RFC: tree-fucker
Status: Draft
Date: 2026-09-03
Author: Kaj Kowalski
Organization: KJANAT
Email: info@kajkowalski.nl
URI: https://github.com/kjanat


Abstract

   tree-fucker maintains an immutable, diffable representation of a
   filesystem tree. It combines an initial scan, filesystem watcher
   events, and bounded directory reconciliation behind one interface.

   Watcher events reduce latency. They are not required for correctness.
   Every loaded directory is listed directly from the filesystem during
   each successful reconciliation round. Modification times and other
   cached metadata never suppress that listing.

   Every filesystem operation the tree performs is admitted through one
   resource governor that accounts worker time, enumerated entries, and
   memory against configured budgets. The tree may become arbitrarily
   slow in pursuit of convergence. It never becomes arbitrarily
   aggressive.

   This document specifies the consistency contract, resource safety
   contract, state model, scheduling rules, failure behavior, and public
   interface of the system.


1.  Conventions

   The key words MUST, MUST NOT, REQUIRED, SHALL, SHALL NOT, SHOULD,
   SHOULD NOT, RECOMMENDED, NOT RECOMMENDED, MAY, and OPTIONAL in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14 [RFC2119]
   [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all capitals.

   Rust declarations in this document describe API shape and semantics.
   They are not a commitment to exact syntax where language limitations
   require a mechanically different representation.


2.  Terminology

   Root
      The filesystem path whose descendants form a tree.

   Entry
      A file, directory, symbolic link, or other filesystem object known
      to the tree.

   Loaded directory
      A directory whose immediate children are represented in the
      snapshot and whose policy state requires continued observation.
      Excluded and explicitly unloaded directories are not loaded.

   Loading directory
      A directory selected for loading whose complete current listing has
      not yet been accepted. Its immediate children are not represented.

   Listing
      A successful read of a directory's immediate children from the
      filesystem. A metadata read of the directory itself is not a
      listing.

   Snapshot
      An immutable, versioned representation of all known entries and
      directory load states.

   Update
      A transition from one snapshot version to another, accompanied by
      the changes that produced it.

   Watcher
      A platform or polling facility that reports possible filesystem
      changes. A watcher event is a hint that some paths should be read.

   Reconciliation
      Listing a directory and comparing the result with the current
      snapshot, independently of watcher events.

   Baseline cursor
      A persistent position in a stable ordering of loaded directories.
      Advancing the cursor gives every loaded directory finite access to
      reconciliation work.

   Reconciliation round
      A finite baseline traversal over an obligation set captured when the
      round begins. Each obligation receives exactly one designated round
      attempt. A round ends after every obligation reaches an Accepted,
      Unsatisfied, or Removed terminal state. It is successful when every
      remaining obligation is Accepted; otherwise it is degraded.

   Obligation set
      The EntryId and load generation of every directory that is loaded
      when a reconciliation round begins. A directory loaded later joins
      the next round. A directory removed, unloaded, or excluded before
      its attempt is removed from the current obligation set. An
      implementation MAY represent the set by retaining the snapshot
      version current at round start instead of enumerating its members.

   Accepted listing
      A complete listing result that was normalized, validated against
      every applicable publication guard, and applied to the current
      snapshot. A valid empty diff is accepted. A failed, cancelled, stale,
      stuck, or discarded result is not accepted.

   Designated round attempt
      The one filesystem job assigned to satisfy a round obligation. A job
      originally dispatched for another reason can be designated when it
      is accepted before the baseline cursor reaches it or while it is in
      active state when the cursor arrives. Jobs and events accepted after the
      obligation becomes terminal do not reopen that obligation.

   Causal barrier
      A value from the coordinator-wide monotonically increasing sequence
      assigned when a command is accepted or a reconciliation round starts.
      Filesystem jobs receive dispatch generations from the same sequence.
      A job is post-barrier only when its dispatch generation is greater
      than the barrier.

   Publication domain
      The state one job may publish for its target: the target's binding
      and path, kind, configured metadata, load state, and the
      immediate-child projection a listing of that target reconciles.
      Each domain is versioned by a target-state generation. A directory's
      immediate-child name-to-EntryId mapping is versioned separately by
      its child-binding generation.

   Root incarnation
      One continuous period during which the configured root is available
      as the same observed directory. Each confirmed reappearance starts a
      new incarnation.

   Priority directory
      A loaded directory requested by a consumer for lower-latency
      reconciliation. Priority changes scheduling, not correctness.

   Quiescent tree
      A tree whose relevant filesystem state is no longer changing.

   Storage domain
      A mount instance as traversal reaches it: the unit at which
      crossing policy, accounting, concurrency, and watcher capabilities
      apply. A domain records, separately and where the platform exposes
      them, the underlying filesystem instance that supplies its
      semantics, the identity space within which file identities are
      comparable, and its transport. Two mounts of one identity space
      are two domains for policy and accounting that share that identity
      space. A filesystem instance can contain several identity spaces:
      each Btrfs subvolume is an independent inode namespace [BTRFS].
      Neither st_dev nor a mount identifier alone is a domain key on
      every platform. A tree can span several domains.

   Domain crossing
      The point at which traversal enters a directory that belongs to a
      different storage domain than its parent. Crossing is detected by
      the adapter and is subject to policy under Section 14.3.

   Resource governor
      The component that decides whether admitted work may run, by
      accounting filesystem cost against configured budgets. The
      scheduler decides which eligible work runs. The governor decides
      whether it runs.

   Worker time
      Time during which a blocking filesystem worker slot is occupied,
      measured by the monotonic clock. Worker time is the unit of
      resource accounting. It sums across concurrent workers.

   Listing session
      A bounded, chunked enumeration of one directory's immediate
      children that the adapter performs under a cancellation token and
      an entry ceiling. A session ends in exactly one typed outcome. Only
      a Complete outcome carries children.

   Observation
      The minimum information a listing needs for membership
      reconciliation: a child's name, its kind where the enumeration
      supplies it, and its identity where the domain supplies a reliable
      one.

   Enrichment
      A separately requested and separately governed read of configured
      metadata for observed children.

   Stuck worker
      A filesystem worker whose call has neither returned nor been
      reported lost within the configured stuck threshold. It continues
      to occupy its slot and to accrue worker time until it returns.


3.  Goals

   tree-fucker has the following goals:

   1. Maintain eventual agreement between loaded directory contents and
      the underlying filesystem without trusting watcher completeness.

   2. Publish immutable snapshots and ordered, diffable updates.

   3. Bound reconciliation work so large trees do not cause periodic
      full-tree pauses.

   4. Keep watcher latency independent from reconciliation correctness.

   5. Remain correct with coarse, future-dated, non-monotonic, or
      otherwise unreliable filesystem modification times. POSIX permits
      callers to set supported timestamps explicitly [POSIX-UTIMENS].

   6. Support native recursive watchers, native non-recursive watchers,
      polling watchers, and operation without a watcher.

   7. Make filesystem races, event loss, queue pressure, and I/O failure
      observable and testable.

   8. Avoid dependence on a particular async runtime.

   9. Bound the resources the tree consumes on the host. Slow progress
      is an acceptable outcome. Exceeding a configured resource ceiling
      is not.


4.  Non-Goals

   tree-fucker does not provide:

   1. A transactional view of a filesystem that is changing while it is
      read. POSIX leaves the visibility of entries added or removed during
      directory iteration unspecified [POSIX-READDIR], and Rust exposes
      that platform iterator directly [RUST-READ-DIR].

   2. Instantaneous convergence. Reconciliation is bounded and eventual.

   3. File-content synchronization. The tree tracks paths, kinds, load
      state, and configured metadata. Consumers read and write contents.

   4. Distributed replication, conflict resolution, or remote transport.

   5. Filesystem journaling or recovery across process restarts.

   6. A guarantee that every platform watcher reports every change.
      Linux, macOS, and Windows all document event-loss or rescan cases
      [INOTIFY] [FSEVENTS] [RDCW].

   7. Stable identity across arbitrary delete-and-create or rename
      sequences. Identity preservation is best effort unless the
      filesystem supplies an unambiguous stable identifier.

   8. Interruption of a filesystem call that has entered the kernel. No
      supported runtime stops a blocked directory read or metadata call
      [TOKIO-BLOCKING]. The tree represents such a call as a stuck
      worker under Section 13.5 instead of claiming to cancel it.


5.  Consistency Contract

5.1.  Directory Guarantee

   Every reconciliation round MUST reach a terminal outcome after each
   designated round attempt reaches a terminal outcome. Work admitted for
   other reasons does not extend the round. There is no wall-clock bound:
   filesystem calls can be arbitrarily slow or can fail to return. A
   call that never returns holds its worker slot as a stuck worker under
   Section 13.5. Its logical job reaches a Stuck outcome at the stuck
   threshold, which makes the designated obligation Unsatisfied, so the
   round can still end; the physical slot stays held until the call
   returns.

   A round MAY also remain open because the resource governor defers
   admission of its remaining obligations under Section 15. Deferral is
   neither a Successful nor a Degraded outcome. It is reported as a
   throttled state and the round resumes when capacity returns.

   In a successful round, every remaining obligation MUST have one
   accepted listing dispatched after that round's causal barrier. A stale,
   discarded, or uncommitted result does not satisfy an obligation.

   A degraded round records its unsatisfied obligations, schedules them
   for retry, publishes degraded health, and ends. The next round starts
   normally so one persistently failing directory cannot prevent healthy
   directories from receiving continued baseline coverage.

   A watcher event, directory modification time, inode, file identifier,
   cached child count, or previous listing result MUST NOT be used to
   avoid this required listing.

   A publication-valid accepted listing dispatched after the round barrier
   for another reason MUST satisfy a still-Pending obligation when it
   targets the same EntryId and load generation and carries the active
   round's reconciliation generation. The implementation MUST track this
   by reconciliation and dispatch generation, not by filesystem time.

5.2.  Eventual Convergence

   If all of the following remain true:

   1. the relevant filesystem subtree becomes quiescent;

   2. filesystem operations eventually succeed;

   3. the coordinator and workers continue to make progress;

   4. the applicable paths remain loaded;

   5. the represented tree remains within configured entry limits; and

   6. no fatal tree error occurs,

   then the snapshot MUST eventually agree with successful filesystem
   listings for those paths.

   Newly discovered directories can require additional listings. The
   convergence bound is therefore expressed in completed work, not wall
   time.

   Resource throttling under Section 15 delays condition 3; it does not
   negate it while physical workers make progress and the relevant hard
   limits permit the operation. A job denied for lack of budget is
   granted once its buckets refill and a slot is free. A job that a hard
   limit forbids indefinitely, such as a listing above the entry ceiling
   or a command past its worker-time ceiling, is reported as
   ResourceLimited under Section 13.1 rather than deferred.

5.3.  Watcher Independence

   Suppressing any finite or infinite subset of watcher events MUST NOT
   invalidate the directory guarantee.

   A working watcher SHOULD cause affected paths to converge before the
   baseline cursor reaches them. Without one, a state that remains present
   after the tree becomes quiescent is detected by the first accepted
   listing dispatched afterward for its containing directory. No
   wall-clock bound is implied.

5.4.  Metadata

   Modification time, creation time, size, permissions, inode, file ID,
   and similar values are metadata. They MAY be stored, diffed, and
   published.

   Metadata MUST NOT be treated as proof of directory contents.
   In particular, equality of modification times MUST NOT suppress a
   required directory listing.

   Timestamp equality is known to classify changed state as unchanged
   when multiple observations fall within one filesystem clock period
   [RACY-GIT]. This demonstrates why timestamp equality alone cannot serve
   as a general unchanged-state proof.

5.5.  Failure Qualification

   A reconciliation round containing an unsatisfied obligation is
   degraded. The implementation MUST report the failed paths and retain
   retry work. It MUST NOT claim that the round was successful.


6.  Architecture

   The system consists of seven logical components:

   Coordinator
      Owns mutable synchronization state. It receives commands, watcher
      hints, timer notifications, and completed filesystem jobs. It is
      the only component allowed to publish a new snapshot.

   Snapshot store
      Holds the current immutable snapshot and its monotonically
      increasing version.

   Watcher adapter
      Converts backend-specific events into normalized hints. It can be
      absent or degraded without disabling reconciliation.

   Reconciliation scheduler
      Maintains round obligations, cursors, retry work, request barriers,
      and class reservations for every directory-listing reason.

   Resource governor
      Accounts the filesystem cost of every job against per-domain and
      global budgets and decides whether admitted work may start. It is
      consulted for every scheduling class and every recovery path.
      Section 15 defines it.

   Filesystem workers
      Perform bounded metadata and directory-listing jobs. Workers do not
      mutate snapshots.

   Update stream
      Publishes committed snapshot transitions, lifecycle state, and
      recoverable errors to consumers.

   Mutable state MUST have one logical writer. Filesystem reads MAY run
   concurrently, but their results MUST be validated and serialized by
   the coordinator before publication.

   All snapshot-producing filesystem jobs MUST pass through one admission
   scheduler. The scheduler has baseline, control, refresh, watcher,
   priority, and retry classes. Initial scan, load, policy invalidation,
   and root recovery use the control class. Overflow creates future
   baseline obligations rather than a separate class.

   Every filesystem job, whether or not it produces a snapshot, MUST
   additionally be granted by the resource governor before it starts.
   The scheduler chooses among eligible jobs. The governor decides
   whether the chosen job may run now. Neither decision substitutes for
   the other.

   At the beginning of each dispatch cycle, the scheduler computes class
   reservations from jobs that are ready at that instant. A class with
   fewer ready jobs than its reservation releases the unused slots for
   that cycle. Only released slots can be borrowed. Jobs arriving after
   admission begins wait for the next cycle.

   Jobs with multiple reasons are attributed in this order:

      1. baseline, when designated for a round obligation;
      2. control;
      3. refresh;
      4. watcher;
      5. retry; and
      6. priority.

   Attribution controls admission accounting only. Every attached command
   barrier and scheduling reason remains on the coalesced job.


7.  Data Model

7.1.  Entry

   An entry contains at least:

      EntryId
      normalized relative path
      entry kind
      directory load state and load generation, where applicable
      configured metadata
      optional filesystem identity, scoped to the storage domain that
      supplied it

   EntryId values are scoped to one tree instance and MUST NOT be reused
   during that instance's lifetime.

   Identity comparisons are meaningful only between entries whose
   storage domains declare the same identity space. An identity space is
   at most one filesystem instance and can be smaller: each Btrfs
   subvolume is an independent inode namespace, so two subvolumes of one
   Btrfs filesystem are two identity spaces even though a bind mount and
   its origin within one subvolume share one [BTRFS]. A
   device-and-inode pair, a file identifier, or
   any other identity establishes a rename only where the domain
   declares stable identity; that declaration is a capability, never an
   assumption, and remote, userspace, overlay, and virtual filesystems
   declare it only when the adapter knows it holds. An identity supplied
   by a domain whose identity reliability is advisory MAY be published
   as metadata but MUST NOT establish a rename.

   Implementations MAY retain an EntryId across a rename when identity is
   unambiguous. Consumers MUST tolerate a rename represented as removal
   plus addition with a new EntryId.

   A filesystem adapter can advertise stable rename identity. Only then
   MAY an update contain an atomic rename change that preserves EntryId.
   Without that capability, rename is represented as removal and addition.

7.2.  Directory Load State

   A directory is in exactly one of these states:

   Unloaded
      The directory entry is known, but its children are not represented
      and it does not participate in reconciliation.

   Loading
      The directory is selected or explicitly requested for loading, but
      no complete listing has been accepted for its current load
      generation. Its immediate children are not represented. It receives
      control and retry work but does not participate in reconciliation.

   Loaded
      Its immediate children are represented and it participates in every
      reconciliation round.

   Excluded
      The directory entry remains represented, but policy excludes its
      descendants. It does not participate in reconciliation.

   The first accepted listing for a Loading directory MUST atomically
   install its immediate children and transition it to Loaded. A retryable
   failure defined in Section 13.1 leaves it Loading. Other outcomes follow
   Section 13. Removal, unload, or exclusion MUST invalidate its work and
   remove it or transition it to Unloaded or Excluded.

   A directory MUST be in exactly one load state. Loading and Unloaded
   directories MUST NOT have represented immediate children.

7.3.  Snapshot

   A snapshot is immutable after publication. It provides lookup by path
   and EntryId, ordered traversal, child traversal, and its version.

   Applying a listing MUST produce either one complete new snapshot or no
   snapshot. Consumers MUST NOT observe partially applied directory
   changes.

7.4.  Update

   A delta update contains:

      previous snapshot version
      new snapshot version
      new snapshot handle
      ordered path changes
      health state
      recoverable errors assigned to this publication event

   Path changes distinguish addition, removal, atomic rename, metadata
   change, kind change, and load-state change. A Rename carries EntryId,
   old path, and new path. A directory Rename atomically rebases every
   represented descendant, and every moved binding advances its entry
   generation. A change of load generation without a change of load
   state is not a load-state change.

   Rename MUST be emitted only when accepted listings of every affected
   parent establish the move and the adapter supplies unambiguous stable
   identity. A watcher hint alone MUST NOT emit Rename. Otherwise the move
   is a removal followed by an addition.

   Path changes describe the net difference between the named previous and
   new snapshots and form one indivisible transaction. Their canonical
   order is:

      1. removals, deepest path first;
      2. renames, interpreted as one simultaneous phase;
      3. kind changes;
      4. load-state changes;
      5. additions, shallowest path first; and
      6. metadata changes.

   Removals use previous-snapshot path order. Renames use old path and then
   new path. Kind, load-state, addition, and metadata changes use
   new-snapshot path order. EntryId is the final tie-breaker. Consumers MUST
   NOT expose intermediate transaction states.

   Update order MUST match snapshot version order. Health state consists
   of orthogonal initial-scan, root-availability, watcher-health,
   reconciliation-health, resource, and shutdown fields. An
   implementation MUST NOT collapse these independent conditions into one
   mutually exclusive state. The resource field is defined in Section
   15.6. Throttling is not degradation, and degradation is not
   throttling.

   Root availability is Available with a root-incarnation generation, or
   Unavailable with the last incarnation generation. Initial-scan state is
   Running, Degraded with failed paths, Complete, or Unavailable. Running,
   Degraded, and Complete identify the root incarnation to which they apply.
   A degraded initial scan MAY become Complete after background retries
   accept every required initial listing.

   A reset update contains a complete snapshot and health state. It MAY
   replace queued Delta and Health events for a slow consumer. Applying
   either all delivered deltas, or a Reset followed by every subsequently
   delivered Delta, MUST produce the snapshot version named by the last
   applied event.

   A Reset supersedes a Delta only when the Delta's new version is at most
   the Reset version. It supersedes a Health event only when the Health
   event's current snapshot version is at most the Reset version and the
   Reset preserves the newest health and every undelivered error or an
   explicit truncated-error count. It MUST NOT supersede Terminal or an
   event for a later snapshot version.


8.  Path and Scan Policy

   Policy determines whether an entry is excluded, unloaded, or loaded.
   Policy can depend on path, kind, depth, revisioned parent context, and
   consumer-owned state.

   The policy interface MUST be able to derive child context from parent
   context and directory entries. Every evaluation carries a policy
   revision. A stateless path predicate MAY implement policies that do not
   require traversal context.

   The logical policy operations are:

      revision() -> PolicyRevision
      root_context(root_metadata) -> PolicyContext
      classify(parent_context, path, metadata) -> ScanDecision
      child_context(parent_context, directory_listing) -> PolicyContext

   `ScanDecision` is Excluded or Eligible with an `initially_loaded` flag.
   `PolicyContext` is an opaque, revisioned value owned by the policy
   implementation. A changed child context increments the affected
   policy-context generation.

   Excluded takes precedence over every explicit load request. For an
   Eligible directory, `load` and `unload` install a path-scoped override
   of `initially_loaded`. The override persists across policy revisions
   while the path remains Eligible and refers to the same EntryId. It is
   removed when the entry is removed or becomes Excluded. A newly Eligible
   entry starts from `initially_loaded`.

   A policy change increments the policy revision and MUST identify the
   roots whose decisions may have changed. Those roots are invalidated and
   reevaluated. Listings dispatched under an older relevant revision MUST
   NOT commit after invalidation.

   Invalidation MUST immediately install a revision fence over each named
   root and every represented descendant. Results captured before the
   fence MUST NOT commit within that scope. The coordinator MUST then
   reevaluate the represented subtree in parent-before-child order. When
   inherited context changes, it MUST increment the affected context
   generation and recursively enqueue represented descendants. Rejecting
   old jobs alone is not reevaluation.

   Unloaded and Excluded directories themselves are reevaluated, but
   policy invalidation MUST NOT invent unrepresented descendants. A
   transition that requires loading enters Loading; its listing uses the
   control class and normal admission bounds. Policy traversal does not
   satisfy a baseline obligation unless it produces an otherwise eligible
   accepted listing.

   Any accepted read that changes a policy input, including path, depth,
   kind, configured metadata, or derived parent context, MUST invoke the
   same fencing and reevaluation procedure even without an explicit policy
   invalidation command. The directly changed entry MUST be reclassified
   in the committing transaction. Every affected represented descendant is
   then reevaluated parent before child under the installed fence.

   Excluded, Unloaded, and Loading directories do not participate in
   baseline reconciliation. A directory entering Loaded after a round
   begins joins the next round. Unloading it removes its current obligation
   and pending work.


9.  Public Interface

   The logical public interface is:

      pub struct Tree { .. }
      pub struct TreeHandle { .. }
      pub struct Snapshot { .. }
      pub struct Update { .. }
      pub struct Config { .. }

      impl Tree {
          pub async fn open(
              filesystem: Arc<dyn FileSystem>,
              root: PathBuf,
              policy: Arc<dyn ScanPolicy>,
              config: Config,
          ) -> Result<(TreeHandle, UpdateStream)>;
      }

      impl TreeHandle {
          pub fn snapshot(&self) -> Snapshot;
          pub fn health(&self) -> Health;
          pub fn stats(&self) -> Stats;
          pub async fn initial_scan_complete(&self) -> Result<()>;
          pub async fn refresh(&self, paths: Vec<RelativePath>)
              -> Result<()>;
          pub async fn load(&self, path: RelativePath) -> Result<()>;
          pub async fn unload(&self, path: RelativePath) -> Result<()>;
          pub async fn invalidate_policy(
              &self,
              roots: Vec<RelativePath>,
          ) -> Result<()>;
          pub async fn set_priority(
              &self,
              paths: impl IntoIterator<Item = RelativePath>,
          ) -> Result<()>;
          pub async fn shutdown(&self) -> Result<()>;
      }

   Every Tree opened in one process shares one host governor (Section
   15.9). `open` uses the process-wide governor. An API that opens a tree
   under an independently constructed governor MUST be named as an
   opt-out from the process-wide guarantee, and a tree opened that way is
   outside the bound that Section 15.9 states for the process. A consumer
   that opens trees through `open` multiplies nothing; the physical
   ceilings and the global accounting are one per process.

   A command is accepted only after the coordinator assigns it a causal
   barrier. If command capacity is exhausted, the command fails before
   acceptance. Dropping a caller-side future does not cancel an accepted
   command.

   Commands and job dispatches allocate values from the sequence defined
   in Section 2. A read satisfies barrier B only when its dispatch
   generation is greater than B. A pre-barrier job MAY commit when every
   publication guard remains valid, but it MUST NOT satisfy the command.
   Coalescing MUST retain a required post-barrier successor read.

   A causal barrier orders only actions observed by the coordinator. It
   does not make filesystem operations linearizable and does not wait for
   unrelated earlier jobs.

   `initial_scan_complete` succeeds when initial traversal is exhausted and
   every initial obligation is Accepted or Removed. It fails with the set
   of degraded paths when traversal is exhausted and every obligation is
   terminal but at least one is Unsatisfied. Background retries continue
   after this failure and can move initial-scan health from Degraded through
   Running to Complete. The call binds to the root incarnation active when
   invoked. Root loss fails its waiters with RootUnavailable; callers invoke
   it again for a recovered incarnation.

   `refresh` succeeds after each target has an accepted read dispatched no
   earlier than its barrier. An already in-flight read dispatched before
   the barrier does not satisfy the command. A not-found result is an
   accepted refresh result when it commits the corresponding removal or a
   post-barrier parent listing proves that an unrepresented target is
   absent.

   `load` transitions an Unloaded target to Loading and succeeds after the
   named directory enters Loaded state through an accepted post-barrier
   listing. A target already Loading or Loaded still requires an accepted
   post-barrier listing. Descendants selected for loading by policy
   continue as ordinary scan work unless the API explicitly requests
   recursive completion.

   `unload` succeeds after represented descendants are removed, pending
   work is cancelled, and in-flight results are invalidated. It does not
   require filesystem I/O.

   `invalidate_policy` succeeds after affected entries are reevaluated and
   all resulting load, unload, and exclusion transitions are committed.
   Every directory newly selected for loading creates a policy-listing
   obligation before completion.

   Required policy-listing obligations are keyed by EntryId and load
   generation and have Pending, Accepted, Removed, or Unsatisfied states.
   Removal, unload, exclusion, or kind change resolves an obligation as
   Removed. The command succeeds when reevaluation is complete and every
   obligation is Accepted or Removed. A terminal required-read failure
   makes its obligation Unsatisfied and fails the command under the error
   rules below. A stale or discarded result leaves it Pending and queues a
   successor.

   `set_priority` succeeds after the coordinator replaces the priority set.
   It does not wait for a listing or create a snapshot version.

   A command that requires no state change completes through an explicit
   acknowledgement; it need not create a snapshot version.

   `shutdown` stops command acceptance, invalidates in-flight work, sets
   every worker's cancellation token, discards results that arrive
   later, publishes terminal health, and closes the update stream. It
   does not wait for blocked filesystem calls; their worker slots are
   released when the calls return. Calls made after shutdown begins fail
   with a shutdown error.

   For `refresh`, `load`, and `invalidate_policy`, a required read that
   reaches Transient, PermissionDenied, Unsupported, ResourceLimited,
   Stuck, or Fatal failure completes the command with that error;
   background recovery follows Section 13. A stale result is rescheduled
   and does not complete the command. There is no wall-clock completion
   bound while the target keeps changing or while the governor defers
   the command's reads.

   Concurrent removal has these command effects:

      refresh
         succeeds when the removal is committed;

      load
         fails with NotFound;

      unload
         succeeds as a no-op; and

      invalidate_policy
         succeeds for the removed portion after committing all remaining
         affected transitions.

   Other terminal conditions have these command effects:

      a configured resource limit reached by a required read, including
      entries per directory, represented entries, listing or snapshot
      bytes, or the command's worker-time ceiling with a required read
      outstanding
         the command fails with ResourceLimited naming the resource;

      worker for a required read declared stuck
         the command fails with Stuck;

      root NotFound or non-directory
         root lifecycle rules in Section 13.2 override this table;

      load of an Excluded directory
         the command fails with PolicyDenied;

      load of a non-directory
         the command fails with NotDirectory;

      pending load whose target becomes Excluded
         the command fails with PolicyDenied;

      pending unload whose target ceases to be a loaded directory
         the command succeeds because its requested terminal state holds;

      kind change during refresh
         the command succeeds after the new kind and metadata commit; and

      fatal tree termination
         every unfinished command fails with TreeTerminated.

   Shutdown completes every other accepted but unfinished command with a
   shutdown error.

   Snapshot reads MUST be non-blocking with respect to filesystem I/O.

   `UpdateStream` yields `Result<UpdateEvent, StreamError>`, where
   `UpdateEvent` is Delta, Reset, Health, or Terminal. Delta carries one
   snapshot transition. Reset carries the latest complete snapshot,
   current health, and all recoverable errors not previously delivered, or
   an explicit truncated-error count. Health carries the current snapshot
   version, current health, and recoverable errors not attached to a Delta
   or Reset. A recoverable error that changes neither snapshot nor health
   MUST produce a Health event; its health value MAY equal the previous
   event's value. Terminal carries final health and is the last item before
   orderly stream closure.

   The update stream is bounded. When a consumer falls behind, the
   implementation MUST replace undelivered deltas with a Reset event or
   disconnect that consumer with an explicit Lagged error. It MUST NOT grow
   memory without bound or silently omit state. Fatal tree termination
   publishes Terminal before closure unless the consumer was already
   disconnected for lag.

   Undelivered Health events MAY be coalesced only when the replacement
   Health or Reset preserves every undelivered error or carries an explicit
   count of truncated errors.

   The core is runtime-neutral. Runtime integration is supplied by an
   adapter that provides task spawning, a blocking-work pool, timers, and
   a monotonic clock. The adapter's cancellation guarantees are limited
   to two operations: preventing queued blocking work from starting,
   which is best effort, and discarding the result of work that has
   started. No supported runtime interrupts a running blocking call
   [TOKIO-BLOCKING]. Cooperative cancellation between enumeration chunks
   is supplied by the core through a token the worker polls, as
   specified in Section 10.2. An adapter MUST NOT expose an operation
   that waits for a running blocking call to stop. The state machine,
   scheduler, and governor MUST run under a deterministic adapter in
   tests.

9.1.  Command Target Resolution

   Command paths are normalized before acceptance. Target resolution has
   the following semantics:

   `refresh`
      A represented Loaded or Loading directory receives a listing. A
      represented Unloaded or Excluded directory receives only a metadata
      read. Refresh MUST NOT by itself request loading or traverse
      descendants. Removal, kind change, and policy or load-state
      consequences required by accepted metadata MUST still commit. A
      represented non-directory receives a metadata read.

      An unrepresented target is resolved from its deepest represented
      Loaded or Loading ancestor by post-barrier parent listings, one path
      component at a time. A listing that proves a component absent is an
      accepted refresh result even when no snapshot version changes. The
      walk MUST stop rather than cross an Unloaded, Excluded, or
      non-directory component, returning NotLoaded, PolicyDenied, or
      NotDirectory respectively.

   `load`
      The exact target MUST already be represented as a directory. Unloaded
      transitions to Loading. Loading and Loaded retain their state while a
      post-barrier listing is scheduled. Excluded fails with PolicyDenied,
      a non-directory fails with NotDirectory, and an unrepresented target
      fails with NotFound. The command MUST NOT probe ancestors or bypass
      policy.

   `unload`
      Loaded or Loading transitions to Unloaded, cancels pending work, and
      removes represented descendants. Unloaded or Excluded succeeds as a
      no-op. An unrepresented target also succeeds as a no-op but MUST NOT
      install an override. A represented non-directory fails with
      NotDirectory.

   `invalidate_policy`
      Every represented target root, including one that is Unloaded or
      Excluded, is reevaluated under Section 8. An unrepresented root
      affects no current entry and succeeds as a no-op; later discoveries
      use the new policy revision.

   `set_priority`
      Normalized paths are stored regardless of current representation.
      Only matching Loaded directories enter the priority cursor. Other
      paths remain dormant and cause no filesystem I/O.

   While the root is unavailable, `refresh` of the root invokes the
   recovery procedure in Section 13.2 and every other root-dependent
   command fails with RootUnavailable. `set_priority`, `snapshot`, and
   `shutdown` retain their stated behavior. These root rules override
   no-op and concurrent-removal behavior elsewhere in this section.

9.2.  Configuration Defaults

   Configuration is owned at two levels. The host governor configuration
   is one per process and holds every physical ceiling and every global
   budget. A tree configuration holds representation limits, policy, and
   per-tree behaviour, and MAY impose a subordinate limit that is tighter
   than the host's. A tree MUST NOT raise a host limit, and opening
   another tree changes no host limit.

   A conforming implementation provides these host governor defaults:

      maximum in-flight jobs             8
      per-domain concurrency ceiling     4
      background duty, per domain        1 percent of one worker
      background duty, global            2 percent of one worker
      background burst, per domain       0.25 worker-seconds
      background burst, global           0.5 worker-seconds
      foreground duty                    25 percent of one worker
      foreground burst                   2 worker-seconds
      bootstrap allowance                0.5 worker-seconds
      aggregate accounted-memory ceiling 512 MiB
      in-flight listing byte ceiling     32 MiB
      initial cost estimate              20 milliseconds
      stuck worker threshold             30 seconds

   and these tree defaults:

      batch size                         64
      pending command capacity           1024
      paths per command limit            65536
      priority-set path limit            4096
      update-stream capacity             256
      coalesced watcher-path limit       16384
      entries per directory limit        250000
      represented entry limit            1000000
      snapshot byte ceiling              256 MiB
      foreground ceiling per command     30 worker-seconds
      metadata fields                    none
      domain crossing                    LoadOnDemand
      transient degrade threshold        3 consecutive failures
      retry maximum delay                5 minutes
      watch registration failure         ReconcileOnly
      root reappearance monitoring       enabled

   Duty rates are expressed in worker-seconds per wall-second (Section
   15.2). One percent of one worker means the tree occupies a blocking
   worker slot for at most ten milliseconds per second on average, plus
   the configured burst. A tree's snapshot byte ceiling counts toward the
   host's aggregate accounted-memory ceiling; the tighter of the two
   binds.

   All numeric limits and listed modes are configurable. Reducing a limit
   below current use fails without changing active state. Reaching an
   entry limit stops the listing session, leaves the previous snapshot
   intact, marks the path degraded with a resource-limit cause, and
   prevents that listing from satisfying a round or command.

   The represented entry limit and the byte ceilings are safety limits,
   not capacity estimates. A consumer that indexes a tree larger than
   the defaults raises them explicitly and thereby accepts the resident
   memory that follows. A limit that can only be discovered through
   memory exhaustion is not a safety limit.

   A command exceeding its path limit MUST fail before acceptance. A
   `set_priority` call exceeding the priority-set path limit MUST fail
   without replacing the existing priority set.

   `open` MUST reject InvalidConfig before creating tree state unless all
   of these conditions hold:

      batch_size is at least 2
      maximum_in_flight is greater than zero
      per_domain_concurrency is at least 1 and at most maximum_in_flight
      every duty rate is finite, greater than zero, and at most
      maximum_in_flight
      every burst and every byte ceiling is greater than zero
      entries_per_directory is at least 1
      stuck_threshold is greater than zero
      minimum_period is greater than zero and at most maximum_period
      retry_maximum_delay is at least minimum_period
      any configured fixed interval is greater than zero
      every expedited class weight is greater than zero
      baseline_share is finite, at least zero, and less than 1

   Root reappearance polling and retries use exponential backoff from the
   minimum reconciliation period to the configured maximum delay.


10.  Filesystem Abstraction

   The filesystem interface supplies, at minimum:

      root and path canonicalization
      entry metadata
      directory listing sessions
      metadata enrichment
      storage-domain identification and capabilities
      watcher registration and removal
      normalized watcher event streams

   The abstraction separates directory listing from metadata reads so
   tests and implementations can observe which operation establishes
   correctness and which operation costs what.

10.1.  Observation and Enrichment

   Directory-membership correctness needs, for each immediate child:

      its name;
      its kind, distinguishing directory, file, symbolic link, and
      other, where the enumeration primitive supplies it; and
      a reliable identity where the storage domain supplies one.

   It does not need modification time, size, permissions, or any other
   metadata. A listing session MUST NOT perform a per-child metadata read
   to obtain what the enumeration primitive already supplies. On
   platforms where directory enumeration reports a child's type
   [GETDENTS] [WIN32-FIND-DATA], the adapter MUST use it instead of a
   metadata call.

   An enumeration primitive MAY report a child's kind as unknown. An
   unresolved child MUST NOT be committed, removed, or traversed on a
   guess, and a listing containing an unresolved child MUST NOT be used
   to prove that any name is absent. The adapter resolves unknown kinds
   with metadata reads inside the same session. Those reads are counted
   and charged as metadata operations. They are not a failure threshold,
   because a filesystem that never reports kinds would otherwise never
   converge.

   For every storage domain the adapter declares, per item, whether the
   enumeration primitive supplies it inline or whether obtaining it
   requires an additional operation per child: the child's kind, its
   identity, and each metadata field. On Unix the inode number is inline
   in the directory entry, the kind is usually inline, and every metadata
   field requires a per-child read. On Windows kind, timestamps, and size
   are inline and identity requires a handle. The governor charges every
   per-child operation the session performs. Identity acquisition MUST
   NOT be modelled as metadata I/O where the platform supplies it inline.

   Configured metadata is obtained by enrichment: a separately requested
   read of the configured fields for observed children. Enrichment is
   requested only for fields the configuration enables and is charged to
   the same budgets as the listing. The default configuration enables no
   metadata fields. A consumer that needs modification times or sizes
   enables them explicitly and accepts their cost.

   A Complete membership observation commits independently of
   enrichment. Enrichment is separately admitted and separately
   retryable work whose failure degrades the metadata of the affected
   children; it MUST NOT prevent a structurally valid membership listing
   from committing. Unknown-kind resolution remains part of the
   membership observation, because kind decides whether traversal is
   safe. A baseline round MUST refresh every enabled field for each
   loaded directory and its immediate children; that refresh MAY be
   performed by the listing session or by a separate enrichment job.
   Round success under Section 5.1 is a membership property. A pending
   or failed enrichment does not degrade the round; it is reported as a
   metadata degradation of the affected path.

   Metadata equality never proves that directory contents are unchanged
   (Section 5.4). Disabling enrichment therefore removes cost, not
   correctness. File contents are never part of a listing.

10.2.  Listing Sessions

   A listing session enumerates one directory in bounded chunks. Between
   chunks the adapter MUST check a cancellation token supplied by the
   core and the configured entry ceiling. A session ends in exactly one
   of:

      Complete, carrying every observed child and their resolved kinds;
      Cancelled, when the token was set;
      ResourceLimited, when the entry ceiling or result-size ceiling was
      reached, carrying the count seen so far; or
      Failed, carrying a classified error.

   Only Complete carries children. An adapter MUST NOT accumulate more
   than the entry ceiling plus one chunk before stopping. The core never
   observes a partial listing under any outcome, so the all-or-nothing
   rule of Section 7.3 holds by construction.

   Admission of a session is not admission of unbounded work. A session
   runs under a work lease that covers a bounded number of enumerated
   entries and per-child operations. Before each chunk, and before each
   batch of kind-resolution or enrichment reads, the session MUST hold
   remaining lease; when it does not, it MUST yield and continue only
   after the governor grants a further lease. A lease that is not granted
   leaves the session suspended with its partial state held in its
   bounded buffer, or ends it as Cancelled when the coordinator prefers
   to release the buffer. Chunking therefore bounds filesystem pressure,
   not only memory and cancellation latency: one underestimated listing
   cannot perform an unbounded number of operations before the governor
   can react.

   A session waiting for a subsequent lease MUST NOT occupy a physical
   filesystem-worker slot. It MAY retain bounded continuation state, an
   open directory handle or iterator, and its partial buffer, but
   yielding a lease returns physical execution capacity to the host
   governor, and continuation resumes only after both a new lease and a
   physical slot are granted. A throttled session therefore costs memory
   and a handle, never a worker.

   The worst-case latency of cooperative cancellation is one chunk of
   enumeration plus one blocked filesystem call. The second term has no
   bound.

   The adapter reports, with every session outcome, the cost defined in
   Section 15.2.

10.3.  Storage Domains and Capabilities

   The adapter identifies the storage domain of every directory it lists
   and reports it with the session outcome, together with whether the
   directory is a domain root. Because the crossing policy of Section
   14.3 must be applied before a candidate directory is first listed,
   and because directory enumeration on most platforms does not report
   a child's mount, the abstraction also provides a governed domain
   resolution operation for a directory that has not been listed.
   Enumeration MAY report a child's domain inline where the platform
   supplies it, in which case no separate resolution is needed.

   Operations performed before a domain is known, including root
   canonicalization, root validation, root probes, and domain resolution
   itself, are charged to a bootstrap scope: a conservative allowance
   under the global ceilings that is attributed to the resolved domain
   once it is known.

   Capabilities are declared per storage domain, never once per tree:

      filesystem semantics, such as ext4, Btrfs, XFS, ZFS, APFS, HFS+,
      NTFS, ReFS, exFAT, FAT, NFS, SMB, FUSE, tmpfs, overlay, or
      Unknown;
      access topology: local, remote, userspace, virtual, protocol
      native, or Unknown;
      transport hint: NVMe, SATA, SAS, USB, SD, iSCSI, Fibre Channel,
      network, virtual, memory, or Unknown;
      media hint: rotational, solid-state, removable, optical, memory,
      or Unknown;
      case sensitivity, declared per domain and refined per directory
      where the platform carries a per-directory attribute;
      timestamp granularity, declared per domain because no platform
      reports it;
      identity space: the namespace within which this domain's
      identities are comparable, shared by every domain that maps the
      same namespace and by nothing else;
      identity reliability: none, advisory, or stable;
      kind source: whether enumeration reports kinds always, sometimes,
      or never;
      identity source: inline from enumeration, per-child read, or none;
      metadata source per field: inline from enumeration or per-child
      read; and
      watcher capabilities under Section 10.4.

   Every field supports Unknown, and Unknown is the required value for
   anything the adapter cannot establish. Filesystem type is semantic
   information. No field implies performance. An implementation MUST NOT
   encode an assumption that a local, solid-state, or NVMe-backed domain
   is fast. Section 15.5 measures instead. A label MAY select a more
   conservative starting profile; it MUST NOT select a less conservative
   one.

   An adapter backed by the operating system detects what the platform
   exposes and declares Unknown for the rest. An adapter that implements
   a protocol itself declares what it knows instead of detecting it. An
   ext4 filesystem reached over iSCSI is semantically ext4 and
   topologically remote block storage. Detection MUST NOT run synthetic
   benchmarks and SHOULD reuse metadata the listing already obtains.
   Platform guidance appears in Section 14.3.

10.4.  Watcher Capabilities

   Watcher capabilities are declared per storage domain and answer:

      whether a watcher is available;
      whether it is recursive or per-directory;
      whether it observes changes made by writers outside this host,
      answered Yes, No, or Unknown;
      whether it can lose events;
      whether it signals overflow or rescan;
      whether it has known registration gaps; and
      whether polling fallback is required.

   A notification source on a network or userspace filesystem that does
   not observe external writers is declared as such, and the tree MUST
   treat it as latency assistance for local writes only [INOTIFY]
   [FANOTIFY]. A protocol-native adapter MAY declare stronger
   notification than the host watcher provides for the same mount.

   Watcher capability affects latency strategy. It never affects whether
   reconciliation remains necessary for correctness.

10.5.  Test Implementations

   Test implementations MUST be able to:

      configure recursive and non-recursive watch behavior
      drop selected watcher events
      emit overflow or rescan notifications
      emit unbounded event streams
      pause and resume event delivery
      mutate directory contents without changing mtime
      return future-dated or decreasing mtimes
      fail individual metadata or listing operations
      control watch-registration timing
      assign each path to a storage domain with its own cost profile
      change the domain of a subtree in place
      charge injected worker time to any operation without sleeping
      deliver listing chunks under harness control
      report unknown kinds for selected children
      declare identity as absent or advisory
      hold a worker indefinitely to model a stuck call


11.  Synchronization Algorithm

11.1.  Initial Scan

   The initial scan starts at the root and applies scan policy while
   traversing descendants.

   The initial scan is background work. It draws on the background
   budgets of Section 15.3 and is admitted job by job under the same
   rules as reconciliation. A tree larger than the budget permits in a
   given time takes longer to scan. It does not scan faster.

   When a watcher is configured, its registration attempt MUST complete
   before the corresponding listing is dispatched. This applies to each
   Loading directory for a per-directory backend and to the root before
   its first listing for a recursive backend. The initial root registration
   attempt MUST complete before `open` publishes its handle.

   Successful registration uses this ordering to close the
   listing-before-watch gap:

      establish watch
      list directory
      apply listing

   Apple prescribes starting monitoring successfully before constructing a
   directory hierarchy snapshot, and recommends relisting directories
   changed during the scan rather than comparing event and filesystem
   timestamps [FSEVENTS]. Linux documents the equivalent gap when
   recursively adding inotify watches [INOTIFY].

   A change before the listing appears in the listing. A change after the
   listing should appear as a watcher hint and, even if it does not, is
   found by reconciliation.

   `watch_registration_failure_mode` is either ReconcileOnly or
   RequireWatcher and defaults to ReconcileOnly. On registration success,
   registration precedes listing. On failure, ReconcileOnly MUST publish
   degraded watcher health and schedule the listing without a watch under
   normal admission rules. RequireWatcher MUST NOT dispatch the
   corresponding listing.

   A RequireWatcher failure before handle publication fails `open`. Later,
   a required listing blocked by RequireWatcher reaches a
   WatcherRegistrationFailed terminal outcome. It fails every `refresh`,
   `load`, or `invalidate_policy` command waiting on that listing, records
   the path as a failed initial-scan outcome when applicable, leaves the
   directory Loading, and retries registration under the common retry and
   admission rules. Loss of an established watcher follows Section 13.4.

   Initial-scan obligations are keyed by EntryId and load generation and
   have Pending, Accepted, Removed, or Unsatisfied states. Only traversal
   work carrying the initial-scan reason creates these obligations. An
   accepted first listing resolves one as Accepted. Any retryable terminal
   failure of a Pending obligation resolves it as Unsatisfied. The first
   such transition records the foreground outcome; later transitions retain
   the initial-scan recovery reason. A stale or discarded result leaves it
   Pending and MUST be rescheduled. Removal, unload, exclusion, or kind
   change resolves it as Removed.

   The foreground initial scan ends when traversal is exhausted and every
   initial obligation is terminal. Accepted and Removed are non-failing. If
   any obligation is Unsatisfied, initial-scan health becomes Degraded and
   waiters fail with those paths; otherwise it becomes Complete.

   Background retries for an Unsatisfied path retain an initial-scan
   recovery reason. Admission returns that obligation to Pending. The reason
   propagates to every child directory selected by the accepted listing,
   creating new Pending obligations. During recovery, health is Degraded
   while any obligation is Unsatisfied, Running while traversal or a
   Pending obligation remains and none is Unsatisfied, and Complete only
   after traversal is exhausted with every obligation Accepted or Removed.
   A waiter already completed or failed MUST remain settled.

11.2.  Watcher Hints

   Watcher events are normalized to affected paths and parent
   directories. Create, remove, and rename hints schedule parent listings.
   Metadata or content hints schedule the minimum reads needed to update
   configured metadata.

   Backends can coalesce events, report only a containing path, or split a
   rename into multiple records [INOTIFY] [FSEVENTS]. Normalization MUST
   therefore preserve uncertainty rather than inventing precision.

   Multiple pending hints for the same directory MUST be coalesced.

   Each represented metadata or listing target has a monotonically
   increasing change epoch. Accepting a watcher hint increments every
   affected target's epoch. A job captures its target's epoch at dispatch.
   If a newer epoch exists when the job completes, its result is stale: it
   MUST NOT satisfy a command or round obligation, and the target MUST be
   queued again when a read remains required. A stale result MUST NOT
   commit.

   An accepted `refresh`, or a `load` that requires a read, is an explicit
   invalidation. After resolving each actual read target and before
   dispatch, the coordinator MUST increment that target's change epoch.
   Policy invalidation uses policy generations instead. Overflow and
   watcher restart use reconciliation coverage generations.

11.3.  Reconciliation Scheduling

   The scheduler admits at most `batch_size` new snapshot-producing
   filesystem jobs per dispatch cycle. Watcher hints can request an
   immediate cycle; the timer requests one when periodic baseline work is
   due. `batch_size` MUST be at least 2, defaults to 64, and is
   configurable.

   Admission additionally requires a grant from the resource governor for
   each job (Section 15.3). An immediate cycle admits no job the governor
   denies. Governor denial of a ready job is not an admission outcome:
   the job stays ready, holds no batch slot, changes no obligation or
   retry state, and is reconsidered when the governor reports capacity.

   A dispatch cycle freezes at most `batch_size` ready jobs after applying
   class reservations. Those jobs form a closed batch. Workers execute the
   batch subject to the global in-flight limit and to the per-domain
   concurrency window of Section 15.5. The coordinator MAY keep
   accepting and coalescing inputs, but MUST NOT admit another
   snapshot-producing job until every batch member is Accepted, failed,
   stale or discarded, cancelled, or stuck. Newly ready work joins the
   next cycle.

   Admission into a closed batch is the dispatch point for causal barriers
   and generation capture, even when a job waits for a worker. An admitted
   waiting job is queued, not in flight. A batch member whose publication
   guard is stale before its worker starts MUST be discarded without
   performing I/O where the runtime can prevent the start; where it
   cannot, its cancellation token is set and its result is discarded on
   arrival.

   A batch member whose worker is declared stuck under Section 13.5
   reaches a Stuck terminal outcome as a logical job and leaves the
   batch, so one dead storage domain cannot hold a closed batch open and
   freeze unrelated domains. Its physical worker continues to hold its
   slots and to accrue cost until its call returns.

   Every listing reason enters one of the weighted fair classes defined in
   Section 6. The scheduler divides capacity between:

      baseline work, which advances the round cursor; and
      expedited work from control, refresh, watcher, retry, and priority
      sources.

   When baseline and expedited work are both ready, the baseline
   reservation is:

      clamp(floor(batch_size * baseline_share), 1, batch_size - 1)

   The default baseline share is one half. When only one group is ready, it
   can use every admission slot. No expedited source may bypass admission
   or occupy baseline-reserved admission slots.

   Capacity released during admission as specified in Section 6 MAY be
   borrowed. Weighted rotation among expedited classes MUST give every
   continuously pending class finite service.

   The default expedited class weights are:

      control    4
      refresh    4
      watcher    2
      retry      1
      priority   2

   Priority directories use an independent rotating cursor. A priority
   set larger than its share MUST receive fair service across dispatch
   cycles.

   A directory listed successfully for control, watcher, explicit refresh,
   retry, or priority work during the current round can satisfy its
   baseline obligation. The baseline cursor still advances past it and
   records that the directory was covered in that round.

11.4.  Filesystem Jobs

   A job is active from closed-batch admission through its terminal state,
   including time queued for a worker. The scheduler MUST NOT keep more
   than one snapshot-producing job active for an EntryId. Directory
   listings, file metadata reads, and directory metadata reads all obey
   this rule. Requests for the same entry are coalesced into the active job
   or queued behind it.

   Every job for a represented entry captures:

      relative path
      EntryId
      root-incarnation generation
      entry generation
      load generation
      policy revision
      policy-context generation
      target-state generation
      containing-directory child-binding generation
      change epoch
      dispatch generation
      reconciliation generation
      scheduling reason
      storage domain
      work origin, background or foreground

   Storage domain and work origin select the governor buckets the job is
   charged to and the concurrency window it occupies. They are not
   publication guards.

   Generations change as follows:

      root-incarnation generation
         changes whenever a missing root is confirmed to have reappeared;

      entry generation
         changes when the path-to-EntryId binding or entry kind changes,
         including for every binding moved by a directory rename;

      load generation
         changes on every transition among Loading, Loaded, Unloaded, and
         Excluded;

      policy revision
         changes when the consumer invalidates policy;

      policy-context generation
         changes when derived context affecting the entry changes;

      target-state generation
         belongs to an entry and versions its publication domain: its
         binding and path, kind, configured metadata, load state, and the
         immediate-child projection a listing of it reconciles. It MUST
         advance atomically whenever any of these change, including when
         a committed update changes the path, kind, configured metadata,
         or load state of an immediate child;

      child-binding generation
         belongs to a directory and versions its immediate-child
         name-to-EntryId mapping. It MUST advance on addition, removal,
         replacement, or rename of an immediate child. A change only to
         an existing child's metadata, kind, load state, or descendants
         MUST NOT advance it;

      change epoch
         changes for every accepted watcher hint or explicit invalidation;

      dispatch generation
         is allocated from the coordinator sequence at admission and stored
         as the latest dispatch generation for its actual read target; and

      reconciliation generation
         is allocated whenever a round begins. Overflow or watcher restart
         allocates a newer minimum generation for subsequent coverage
         without changing an active round's generation.

   Root-incarnation, entry, and dispatch generations are publication guards
   for every job. Load generation also guards directory jobs. Policy
   revision and policy-context generation guard a job whenever its result
   can classify an entry or derive policy context. Change epoch guards the
   actual metadata or listing target. A dispatch generation becomes stale
   only when a later job for that target is dispatched or the target is
   invalidated; unrelated coordinator sequence values do not stale it. A
   later dispatch for a sibling never stales a job.

   Every represented-entry job MUST capture its target's target-state
   generation. A non-root job MUST also capture its containing directory's
   child-binding generation. A result spanning multiple publication
   domains MUST guard every such domain. An atomic rename MUST guard both
   affected parents and advance the target-state generation of every moved
   binding. Validation, snapshot application, and generation advancement
   MUST be atomic. An accepted result MUST be applied against the
   coordinator's current snapshot; it MUST NOT replace that snapshot with
   a dispatch-time snapshot.

   A sibling's commit therefore does not stale a job. A change to sibling
   B advances B's target-state generation and the parent's target-state
   generation, neither of which a job for sibling A captures. A parent
   listing in flight is staled instead, which prevents an older parent
   read from overwriting a newer child publication. A commit that adds,
   removes, replaces, or renames an immediate child advances the parent's
   child-binding generation and stales every in-flight job for that
   directory's children.

   A completed result with any stale applicable publication guard MUST be
   discarded in full. The current path is queued again when its state still
   requires the read.

   Publication guards apply to non-Fatal outcomes. Once a Fatal completion
   is correlated with an admitted job, it MUST be handled before
   publication-guard validation. It MUST publish terminal health and
   terminate the tree even when the job's publication guards are stale.
   No snapshot payload from that result may commit.

   Reconciliation generation is a coverage tag, not a publication guard.
   A mismatch MUST NOT by itself prevent an otherwise current result from
   committing. It prevents that result from satisfying a round, overflow,
   or watcher-restart coverage requirement for a newer generation.

   This validation prevents a slow read from resurrecting or regressing an
   entry that was changed, replaced, unloaded, excluded, or reevaluated
   while I/O was in progress.

   A root-recovery probe has no EntryId. It captures the last
   root-incarnation generation, the expected Unavailable state, and a
   dispatch generation. Its result MUST be discarded unless all three
   still match when it completes.

11.5.  Applying a Listing

   A Complete listing session is the only session outcome that reaches
   this procedure. Cancelled, ResourceLimited, and Failed outcomes follow
   Section 13 and commit nothing.

   A successful listing is normalized and compared with the current
   immediate children in the snapshot.

   A metadata read is accepted only after the same generation validation.
   Its configured fields are applied atomically to the current entry. An
   accepted read can produce an empty diff.

   The resulting transaction can:

      add newly observed entries
      remove absent entries and represented descendants
      preserve stable identity through an atomic rename
      change entry kind or metadata
      transition a Loading directory to Loaded
      schedule child directories selected for loading
      cancel jobs for removed or unloaded directories

   The transaction is committed atomically as one new snapshot version.
   An empty structural diff can still publish metadata or health changes.

   Directory enumeration is not assumed to be atomic. POSIX explicitly
   leaves concurrent addition and removal visibility unspecified
   [POSIX-READDIR]. If the directory changes during enumeration, watcher
   hints or the next reconciliation round repair any mixed result after
   the directory becomes quiescent.

11.6.  Overflow and Backend Rescan Requests

   When a watcher reports overflow, journal invalidation, or a rescan
   requirement, the implementation MUST stop treating preceding event
   order as complete.

   `IN_Q_OVERFLOW`, FSEvents dropped-event flags, and a zero-byte or
   `ERROR_NOTIFY_ENUM_DIR` Windows result all require cache reconstruction
   or directory enumeration [INOTIFY] [FSEVENTS] [RDCW]. The `notify`
   crate exposes the same condition as `Flag::Rescan` [NOTIFY].

   Overflow records a minimum reconciliation generation for a subsequent
   round for every loaded directory. It MUST NOT change the active round's
   generation, reset its baseline cursor, or discard its progress. Existing
   work MAY commit when publication-valid but cannot discharge the newer
   requirement. Repeated overflow notifications coalesce into the newest
   required generation.

   Implementations MAY accelerate this work by assigning greater baseline
   weight, but MUST preserve configured admission and concurrency bounds.

11.7.  Explicit Refresh

   `refresh(paths)` schedules immediate reads under the target-resolution
   rules in Section 9.1. It does not remove a baseline-round obligation
   unless an eligible accepted listing carries the active round generation.

   Overlapping refresh requests MUST be coalesced. Every caller MUST still
   receive completion or failure for its request.

11.8.  Round Transitions

   Round state changes according to the following rules:

      Start
         Freeze the current loaded EntryId and load-generation pairs as
         the obligation set. Allocate the round's causal barrier and
         reconciliation generation, then set every obligation to Pending.
         No later load, event, retry, or policy change adds an obligation
         to this round. Every post-barrier listing dispatched for a Pending
         obligation carries the active round generation regardless of its
         original scheduling reason. The implementation MAY represent the
         frozen set by retaining the snapshot version current at round
         start together with a cursor over its loaded directories, and
         keep explicit state only for obligations that are designated,
         accepted ahead of the cursor, awaiting a post-barrier successor,
         or unsatisfied.

      Governor denial
         Leave the obligation Pending and the cursor in place. The round
         remains open and resumes when the governor grants admission.

      Pre-cursor acceptance
         If an accepted listing is post-barrier, carries the active round
         generation, and matches a Pending obligation's EntryId and load
         generation, atomically designate that completed job and set the
         obligation to Accepted. The cursor later skips that terminal
         obligation. A failed, stale, or cancelled job that was not
         designated leaves the obligation Pending.

      Designation
         When the baseline cursor reaches a Pending obligation, designate
         a matching post-barrier active job, whether queued or executing,
         or admit and designate one new round job. Set the obligation to
         Designated. A pre-barrier active job cannot be designated. In that
         case, coalescing MUST reserve a post-barrier successor; the cursor
         may advance, but the obligation remains Pending. The first such
         successor MUST be designated atomically when admitted, even after
         the cursor has advanced.

      Accepted outcome
         Set the designated obligation to Accepted.

      Failed, stale, cancelled, or stuck outcome
         Set the designated obligation to Unsatisfied and retain separate
         retry work when the directory remains Loaded. Later jobs do not
         alter this round's terminal outcome. A late result from a stuck
         worker is discarded.

      Load
         A directory entering Loading is scheduled immediately as control
         work when possible. Only its transition to Loaded makes it
         eligible for the next round's obligation set.

      Remove, unload, or exclude
         Set the matching obligation to Removed and invalidate any
         designated job. A replacement at the same path is a new entry and
         joins the next round.

      Overflow
         Preserve current progress and record a required later generation
         as specified in Section 11.6.

      Cursor wrap
         Stop admitting new baseline obligations for the round. After all
         remaining obligations reach a terminal outcome, publish Successful
         health if all are Accepted; otherwise publish Degraded health
         with unsatisfied paths. Begin a new round without waiting for
         retry success.

      Empty set
         Complete the round successfully without filesystem work. Do not
         start another empty round until a periodic trigger or a directory
         enters Loaded state.


12.  Timing and Backpressure

   Reconciliation uses a monotonic clock. Wall-clock time and filesystem
   timestamps MUST NOT control scheduler progress.

   Periodic baseline work is paced by the resource governor. The budget
   is expressed in worker time (Section 15.2), so concurrency cannot
   reduce accounted cost: a cycle whose eight workers were each blocked
   for 500 milliseconds consumed four worker-seconds, and the governor
   charges four worker-seconds. Wall-clock batch duration is reported as
   a statistic. It is not a budget input.

   Let `next_admissible` be the earliest monotonic time at which the
   governor can grant the next background job on any domain that has
   pending baseline work, when such a time is computable. Bucket
   depletion has a computable refill time. Concurrency exhaustion,
   memory pressure, a per-command ceiling, and a stuck worker have no
   computable resume time; for those the governor reports none and the
   coordinator wakes on the state change that frees capacity. The
   periodic timer is due no earlier than:

      max(now + minimum_period, next_admissible)

   when `next_admissible` is known, and, when capacity exists, no later
   than `now + maximum_period`. An implementation MAY configure a fixed
   interval; the fixed interval is still subject to `next_admissible`.

   The defaults are:

      minimum_period      1 second
      maximum_period      5 minutes

   Duty budgets and their defaults are defined in Sections 9.2 and 15.3.

   The timer determines a due time, not the actual next start. A
   periodic cycle MAY start later while another closed batch is active.
   That delay does not alter its due time, and the ready timer remains
   subject to the finite-service requirement below.

   Immediate command, watcher, or control work queued during a closed
   batch requests an immediate next cycle. An immediate cycle is a
   scheduling opportunity, not a budget. Every job it admits is granted
   by the governor under the same buckets as timer-requested work, so an
   unbounded stream of immediate requests admits no more background work
   than the budget allows.

   A timer that is ready MUST receive finite service even while watcher
   and command streams remain continuously ready. This can be achieved by
   an independent scheduler task, fair selection, or explicit timer
   priority.

   Watcher event queues MUST be bounded or coalesced by path. Queue
   pressure MUST be observable. Dropping watcher hints under pressure is
   permitted because reconciliation preserves eventual correctness.

   `batch_size` bounds the number of filesystem jobs, not the duration of
   an individual filesystem call. An implementation MUST NOT claim to
   interrupt a running filesystem call. Enumeration is chunked and
   cooperatively cancellable under Section 10.2. A call that does not
   return is a stuck worker under Section 13.5.


13.  Error Handling

13.1.  Operation Failure

   Filesystem adapters classify non-success outcomes as NotFound,
   NotDirectory, PermissionDenied, Transient, Unsupported, or Fatal.
   Fatal is reserved for failures that make continued operation of the
   tree unsafe, such as adapter corruption or loss of the backend. A
   path-scoped failure MUST be classified as NotFound, NotDirectory,
   PermissionDenied, Transient, or Unsupported.

   Retryable work outcomes are Transient, PermissionDenied, Unsupported,
   WatcherRegistrationFailed, and the core-generated ResourceLimited and
   Stuck. NotFound and NotDirectory are structural outcomes governed by
   Section 13.2. Fatal terminates the tree.

   Every retry is admitted through the resource governor. A failed or
   cancelled attempt is charged its measured cost, plus a configured
   surcharge against its domain, so the admission time of the next
   attempt is monotone non-decreasing in the cost the target has already
   consumed. Repeated failure converges toward silence, never toward
   more frequent attempts.

   On Transient failure, the current snapshot is retained. The read target
   enters retry state with exponential backoff, jitter, and a configured
   maximum delay. Metadata retries continue while the target remains
   represented and the requirement is not superseded. Listing retries also
   require the directory to remain Loaded or Loading. Passing a configured
   attempt or duration threshold changes path health to degraded but does
   not discard retry work. An accepted recovery read resets that path's
   consecutive transient-failure count.

   The transient threshold applies only to path-level degradation for a
   failure not yet used as a designated round outcome. It MUST NOT suppress
   a degraded reconciliation-round outcome. A designated Transient failure
   degrades that round on its first attempt. Reconciliation health remains
   degraded while either the latest completed round is degraded or another
   path-level degradation cause remains active. A later successful round
   clears only the round-derived cause.

   PermissionDenied and Unsupported retain the current snapshot and publish
   degraded path health immediately. A Loaded directory retries once per
   baseline round or after a relevant watcher hint or explicit refresh. A
   represented metadata target or Loading directory that has no baseline
   opportunity retries with backoff through the retry class.

   ResourceLimited is one structured outcome that names the resource it
   hit: entries per directory, represented entries, listing bytes,
   snapshot bytes, in-flight bytes, or command worker time, together with
   the configured limit. It is reported when a listing session stops at
   the entry or result-size ceiling, when a commit would exceed the
   represented-entry or a byte ceiling, or when a command's reads have
   reached the command's worker-time ceiling while a required read
   remains. It retains the previous snapshot and the current Loaded or
   Loading state, publishes degraded path health with the resource as
   its cause, fails the current command, and makes any designated
   obligation Unsatisfied. It retains one coalesced listing retry,
   admitted only when the governor grants it. A Loaded target can retry
   through later baseline work; a Loading target retries with backoff. A
   relevant watcher hint, explicit refresh, or configured limit increase
   expedites that retry. ResourceLimited never truncates.

   A Stuck outcome is reported for a logical job whose worker exceeded
   the stuck threshold (Section 13.5). It completes an attached command
   with a Stuck error, makes a designated obligation Unsatisfied, and
   retains one coalesced retry. That retry, and every other job for the
   same storage domain, is admitted only after every stuck worker on the
   domain has returned: one stuck worker quarantines the domain.

   Each represented read target retains at most one coalesced retry record.
   The record carries its required phase: Metadata, Listing, or
   WatchRegistrationThenListing, plus attached reasons and barriers. A
   failed required watch registration uses the control class while the
   target remains Loading. Other retries use the retry class.

   Metadata success clears only a Metadata requirement and its matching
   degradation cause. Listing success clears Listing and any metadata
   requirement covered by that listing. Watch-registration success advances
   WatchRegistrationThenListing to Listing; only the accepted listing clears
   it. Success MUST NOT clear an unrelated stronger requirement or
   degradation cause.

   Fatal errors terminate the tree after publishing terminal health,
   regardless of the publication-guard state of the job that reported
   them (Section 11.4).

   Retry work uses the common weighted scheduler. It MUST receive finite
   service and MUST NOT starve baseline, control, watcher, refresh, or
   priority work.

13.2.  Missing Paths and Kind Changes

   A NotFound result for a non-root entry is applied as removal after
   validating all captured generations.

   NotDirectory from a listing is not yet a terminal job outcome. The same
   admitted job MUST confirm it through current metadata supplied with the
   result or one guarded metadata operation before becoming terminal. This
   confirmation does not consume another admission slot. A retryable
   confirmation error fails the job and makes a designated obligation
   Unsatisfied. NotFound follows the root or non-root removal rules. Fatal
   terminates the tree. If confirmation observes a directory, the result is
   stale and the listing is rescheduled.

   An unconfirmed NotDirectory from any non-root read, including a
   confirmation operation, MUST NOT commit a structural change. When
   current metadata does not identify the non-directory EntryId, the
   coordinator MUST reclassify the outcome as Transient and queue guarded
   resolution of the nearest represented ancestor under normal admission.
   Only confirmed current metadata invokes the non-root kind-change rules.

   Initial root NotDirectory MUST fail `open`. After handle publication, a
   generation-valid root NotDirectory MUST directly make the root
   Unavailable without requiring EntryId-identifying metadata.

   Confirmed NotDirectory for a represented non-root directory removes
   represented descendants, changes the entry kind, removes its directory
   load state, and invalidates its directory work atomically. A pending
   `refresh` succeeds after that commit, a pending `load` fails with
   NotDirectory, and matching round, initial-scan, and policy-listing
   obligations become Removed.

   `open` MUST validate that the initial root exists and is a directory
   before returning. Initial NotFound or NotDirectory fails `open`.

   Initial validation and confirmed reappearance MUST atomically allocate
   a fresh monotonically increasing root incarnation and fresh EntryIds,
   set root availability to Available, set initial-scan state to Running,
   and install the root as Loading. Root jobs, watcher registrations,
   watcher events, and initial-scan waiters bind to that incarnation.

   A retryable failure of the first root listing leaves the root Loading.
   Confirmed NotFound or NotDirectory makes it Unavailable under the rules
   below. Fatal terminates the tree.

   After handle publication, a validated root NotFound or change to a
   non-directory MUST atomically:

      mark root availability and initial-scan state Unavailable
      clear the complete snapshot
      remove every active round obligation
      cancel queued work and invalidate in-flight work and watchers
      fail root-dependent commands with RootUnavailable
      fail current initial-scan waiters with RootUnavailable
      publish the snapshot and health transition

   PermissionDenied or Transient root failure retains the previous
   snapshot and follows Sections 13.1 and 13.3. While the root is
   unavailable, no baseline round starts.

   Root reappearance monitoring is built in and enabled by configuration.
   When enabled, control-class probes use the common scheduler and retry
   backoff. When disabled, only `refresh` of the root starts a probe. Other
   refresh targets and all other root-dependent commands fail with
   RootUnavailable.

   After initial validation or confirmed reappearance, the implementation
   applies the watch-registration procedure in Section 11.1 and schedules
   the first root listing. Acceptance transitions the root to Loaded and
   starts policy traversal. A retryable failure leaves it Loading and
   follows Sections 11.1 and 13.1; structural and Fatal outcomes follow the
   preceding root lifecycle rules. Old-incarnation events and job results
   MUST be discarded, and old EntryIds MUST NOT be resurrected.
   A `refresh` of the unavailable root succeeds only after an accepted
   post-barrier root listing for the recovered incarnation.

   `initial_scan_complete` binds to the incarnation active when called. A
   caller whose wait fails because the root vanished invokes it again after
   recovery to observe the new incarnation.

13.3.  Permission Changes

   Permission denial retains the last known representation and reports a
   degraded path. It does not imply that previous children were removed.

13.4.  Watcher Failure

   Watcher failure is reported and reconciliation continues. The watcher
   MAY be restarted with backoff. Restarting it does not reset the
   snapshot and MUST allocate a newer minimum reconciliation generation
   for a subsequent round.

13.5.  Worker Failure and Stuck Workers

   Panic, task cancellation, or channel loss in a filesystem worker MUST
   return its active jobs and read targets to schedulable state or terminate
   the tree with an explicit fatal error. Work MUST NOT disappear silently.

   A worker whose call has neither returned nor been reported lost is a
   stuck worker once its occupancy exceeds the configured stuck
   threshold. A logical job and the physical worker that runs it have
   distinct lifetimes:

      The logical job reaches a Stuck terminal outcome under Section
      13.1. It leaves its closed batch, its designated obligation becomes
      Unsatisfied, its attached commands complete with a Stuck error, and
      its retry state is retained.

      The physical worker continues to hold its domain slot, its global
      in-flight slot, and its share of the physical ceilings, and
      continues to accrue worker time against its domain, until its call
      returns. Discarding the job, setting its cancellation token, or
      declaring it stuck releases nothing physical. No replacement worker
      is started for the same slot. When the call returns, its result is
      discarded if its job is gone, and only then is the slot released.

   The tree MUST report stuck workers with their paths, operations, and
   start times. One stuck worker quarantines its storage domain: while
   any physical worker on a domain is stuck, the governor admits no new
   work on that domain, retries included, and the domain's resource
   state reports StuckWorker. The quarantine lifts when every stuck
   worker on the domain has returned. Other domains are unaffected
   because closed-batch completion counts the logical outcome. A dead
   mount therefore costs exactly the workers that were already inside
   it when it died, never more, and degrades one domain instead of
   exhausting the host's blocking pool.

13.6.  Capacity Exhaustion

   Baseline obligations are represented as scheduler state and MUST NOT be
   dropped because a queue is full. Watcher hints MAY be coalesced or
   dropped after incrementing an overflow counter. Commands that cannot be
   admitted fail before acceptance with a capacity error. Health changes
   are published even when no snapshot data changes.


14.  Paths, Links, and Filesystem Semantics

14.1.  Path Normalization

   Snapshot paths are normalized relative paths. Backend-native paths are
   converted at the filesystem boundary. Paths that cannot be represented
   safely are rejected and reported.

   Case comparison follows the configured filesystem semantics. Display
   casing is retained separately from comparison keys when required.

14.2.  Symbolic Links

   Symbolic links are represented as entries and MUST NOT be traversed.
   Supporting traversal through symbolic links requires a separate
   specification with explicit containment and race semantics.

14.3.  Storage Domains and Mount Boundaries

   Every directory belongs to exactly one storage domain (Section 2). A
   domain is a mount instance as traversal reaches it and is identified
   by the adapter. It records separately, where the platform exposes
   them, the underlying filesystem instance that supplies its semantics
   and identity space, and its transport. Crossing policy, accounting,
   concurrency, and watcher capabilities operate on the mount instance.
   Identity comparisons operate on the identity space. A bind mount and
   its origin are two domains that share one identity space. Two Btrfs
   subvolumes are two identity spaces within one filesystem instance,
   each with its own `st_dev`, while bind mounts are distinct mounts
   sharing one `st_dev` [BTRFS] [STATMOUNT]. `st_dev` is therefore
   neither a domain key nor a filesystem-instance key on every platform,
   and an adapter MUST NOT use it as one where the platform exposes a
   better identifier. A domain crossing is detected
   per mount, at the directory where traversal leaves the parent's
   domain, through the domain-resolution operation of Section 10.3
   before that directory is first listed.

   Crossing is controlled by a configured domain-crossing mode:

      Follow
         The child domain is traversed like any other directory, under
         its own capabilities, its own governor buckets, and its own
         concurrency window.

      Exclude
         The mount point is represented as an Excluded directory. Its
         descendants are never read.

      LoadOnDemand
         The mount point is represented as an Unloaded directory. Its
         descendants are read only after an explicit `load` or a policy
         decision that names it.

   The default is LoadOnDemand. A tree rooted on a local filesystem MUST
   NOT traverse a network, userspace, removable, or virtual filesystem
   mounted beneath the root unless the consumer asks for it. Policy
   receives the child domain's capabilities and MAY refine the mode per
   crossing.

   Domain crossing is visible: the statistics of Section 16 list every
   domain the tree has entered, and a delta that installs a mount point
   as Excluded or Unloaded carries the crossing as its cause.

   Linux documents that mounting over a watched directory produces no
   event and suppresses events beneath the new mount point [INOTIFY]. The
   tree MUST NOT assume uniform watcher behavior beneath the entire root.
   Watcher capabilities are per domain (Section 10.4).

   The remainder of this section is informative platform guidance.

   On Linux an adapter identifies the domain of a directory from the
   unique mount identifier that `statx` returns alongside the metadata
   it already reads, detects a crossing from the mount-root attribute or
   a changed mount identifier, and resolves the mounted instance through
   `statmount`, or through `/proc/self/mountinfo` on kernels without it
   [STATX] [STATMOUNT]. Topology and media hints come from the block
   device tree in sysfs when the instance has one backing device and are
   Unknown for multi-device, network, overlay, and userspace filesystems.
   inotify and fanotify do not report changes made by remote writers on
   network filesystems [INOTIFY] [FANOTIFY]. Case sensitivity on ext4 and
   f2fs is a per-directory attribute and cannot be read per mount;
   timestamp granularity is not queryable and is table-driven per
   filesystem type with a declared override.

   On macOS a domain is keyed by the `f_fsid` that `fstatfs` returns and
   a crossing is detected from a changed `st_dev` during traversal, never
   from the mount table alone: APFS firmlinks join the System and Data
   volumes at directories such as `/Users` without a mount-table entry at
   that path [GETATTRLIST]. `MNT_LOCAL` separates local from network
   volumes. Volume capability bits are meaningful only where the matching
   valid bit is set; otherwise the answer is Unknown. FSEvents observes
   only changes that pass through the local kernel, so a domain that is
   not `MNT_LOCAL` declares that it does not observe external writers,
   and Apple's own guidance is that the event list is advisory and a
   periodic full sweep remains necessary [FSEVENTS].

   On Windows the adapter opens each directory and reads `FILE_ID_INFO`.
   A change in the volume serial number between a parent and its child
   proves that a boundary was crossed; an unchanged serial does not
   prove the opposite, because Windows documents the serial as an opaque
   value generated at format time that is not required to be unique, and
   documents only the pair of serial and 128-bit file identifier as
   identifying a file on one computer [FILE-ID-INFO] [MS-FSCC]. The
   adapter therefore uses a serial mismatch as a crossing detector and
   treats serial equality as inconclusive. Domain identity comes from
   positive evidence: the volume GUID path where the volume management
   call succeeds, a protocol-native adapter's own identity, or another
   platform identifier that names the volume. Without such evidence the
   adapter keeps domains conservatively distinct and reports the identity
   as Unknown, which is the case on SMB shares and ReFS volumes, where
   the call is documented as unsupported. Remoteness comes
   from the remote-protocol information of the handle, not from the
   shape of the path. A junction within one volume is not a crossing.
   Case sensitivity on NTFS is a per-directory flag that the volume flag
   does not reflect. The ReFS 128-bit file identifier is documented as
   stable until deletion and unique within the volume even though its
   low 64 bits index the directory the file was created in, so ReFS MAY
   declare stable identity; the 64-bit identifier is not unique on ReFS
   and MUST NOT be used there [MS-FSCC]. `ReadDirectoryChangesW` reports
   overflow as a successful call with zero bytes and reports an
   unsupported target with `ERROR_INVALID_FUNCTION`; the adapter treats
   the first as a rescan requirement and the second as the absence of a
   watcher for that domain [RDCW].

   On every platform, timestamp granularity, whether external writers
   exist, and the semantics of a userspace or third-party filesystem
   that reports no capabilities are declared, never detected.

14.4.  Special Files

   Sockets, devices, FIFOs, and unknown entry kinds can be represented as
   opaque entries. They are never treated as directories unless the
   filesystem abstraction classifies them as directories.


15.  Resource Safety and Performance Model

   Resource safety is a correctness property of this specification. The
   consistency contract in Section 5 bounds what the tree may claim about
   the filesystem. This section bounds what the tree may do to the host
   while pursuing that contract.

   The governing principle is:

      An implementation MAY become arbitrarily slow in pursuit of eventual
      convergence. It MUST NOT become arbitrarily aggressive.

   Slow progress is an acceptable outcome. Exceeding a configured resource
   ceiling is not. When the two conflict, convergence waits.

15.1.  Resource Safety Contract

   A conforming implementation MUST satisfy all of the following:

   1. Every filesystem operation the tree performs is admitted through
      one resource governor: root canonicalization and validation, root
      probes, domain resolution, watch registration and removal, listing
      sessions and their work leases, kind resolution, metadata reads,
      and metadata enrichment, whatever scheduling class, command, or
      recovery path requested them. Reconciliation, watcher-triggered
      reads, retries, the initial scan, overflow recovery, policy
      invalidation, priority work, and root recovery are all governed.
      No operation bypasses the governor.

   2. The scheduler decides which eligible work runs. The governor
      decides whether work may run at all. A job that is ready for
      dispatch under Section 11.3 is admitted only when the governor
      grants it. Denial leaves every obligation, command barrier, and
      retry record unchanged.

   3. Watcher events influence scheduling priority. They MUST NOT
      increase the configured background envelope: no rate, burst,
      concurrency ceiling, or memory ceiling changes because hints
      arrive. A hint MAY make a job eligible earlier than the baseline
      cursor would; every such job is admitted within the same envelope
      as timer-requested work, so an unbounded stream of hints admits no
      more background work than the envelope allows.

   4. Work explicitly requested by the consumer through `refresh` or
      `load` MAY draw on a separate bounded foreground allowance. That
      allowance is a priority and burst reservation within the shared
      physical ceilings on concurrency and memory; it never bypasses
      them. It has hard ceilings on rate, burst, and per-command
      admitted cost. Foreground and background allowances MUST NOT
      transfer capacity to each other.

   5. Resource exhaustion and throttling are observable through the
      health state defined in Section 15.6. Throttling MUST NOT be
      reported as reconciliation degradation, and reconciliation
      degradation MUST NOT be hidden behind throttling.

   6. Retry behaviour under throttling MUST NOT become more aggressive.
      A failed or cancelled read is charged its full measured cost, and
      the admission time of its retry is monotone non-decreasing in the
      cost the target has already consumed.

   7. Resource limits MAY delay convergence and MAY hold the tree in a
      throttled state indefinitely. They MUST NOT produce a false claim
      of successful reconciliation. A round whose obligations were never
      admitted remains open; it is neither Successful nor Degraded.

   8. A labelled property of storage, such as a filesystem type or a bus
      type, MAY lower a resource ceiling or choose a more conservative
      starting profile. It MUST NOT raise a ceiling. Measured behaviour
      outranks labels.

15.2.  Cost Accounting

   The unit of account is worker time: the time a blocking filesystem
   worker slot is occupied, measured by the monotonic clock. Four workers
   blocked for 500 milliseconds represent two worker-seconds regardless
   of elapsed wall time. Concurrency MUST NOT reduce the accounted cost
   of work.

   The adapter reports, with every completed job and with every lease a
   listing session consumes:

      blocking time occupied by the job
      listing operations performed
      metadata operations performed, including kind resolution
      directory entries enumerated, including entries later filtered
      bytes owned by the returned result
      the storage domain the job ran against

   The coordinator measures, from its own state:

      occupancy, from job start to the terminal input for the job
      queue delay, from admission to start
      throttled duration, while a ready job awaits admission
      represented entries and snapshot bytes
      error, cancellation, and stale-result counts

   A job whose reported blocking time is absent or exceeds its occupancy
   is charged its occupancy. An operation that has not completed is
   charged its occupancy so far at every accounting point: whenever the
   governor evaluates admission, each running job's reservation is
   replaced by the larger of the reservation and its elapsed occupancy.
   A permanently stuck operation therefore never appears to have
   consumed zero budget; it accrues cost continuously until its call
   returns or the tree stops.

   Latency is summarized per storage domain as a moving minimum over a
   short interval together with median and tail estimates. The moving
   minimum is the standing-delay signal; a rising minimum indicates
   contention rather than a slow outlier [CODEL].

15.3.  Budgets and Admission

   The governor maintains token buckets over worker time:

      one background bucket per storage domain
      one global background bucket
      one foreground bucket per storage domain
      one global foreground bucket

   A bucket has a rate in worker-seconds per wall-second and a capacity
   in worker-seconds. Refill is continuous with respect to the monotonic
   clock. A bucket level MAY become negative when reconciled cost exceeds
   the reserved estimate; a negative level blocks admission until refill
   restores it.

   Admission of a job requires all of:

      the applicable domain bucket holds at least the estimated cost;
      the applicable global bucket holds at least the estimated cost;
      the domain's concurrency window has a free slot;
      the global in-flight limit has a free slot; and
      accounted memory plus the estimated result size is within the
      configured ceiling.

   Admission reserves the estimate. Completion, and every accounting
   point before it, reconciles actual occupancy against both the domain
   bucket and the global bucket in full. Global accounting is honest: it
   MUST NOT ignore any part of a job's actual occupancy. Per-domain
   fairness comes from the per-domain buckets and windows, not from
   discounting the global meter.

   The enforceable bound, which a conforming implementation MUST uphold,
   is stated on admission rather than on completion: over any window of
   wall time W and for every storage domain, background worker time
   admitted, that is reserved at admission, is at most rate times W plus
   capacity for that domain, and the same inequality holds globally;
   physical concurrency never exceeds the per-domain windows or the
   global in-flight limit; the actual cost of a running operation is
   charged in full as it accrues; and no further admission occurs on a
   domain or globally while its bucket is in debt. A running call that
   cannot be interrupted MAY overshoot its reservation without bound.
   That overshoot is debt, it is visible in Section 16, and it suppresses
   admission until repaid. No bound on actual worker time over a
   wall-time window is claimed, because Section 4 item 8 makes such a
   bound impossible to enforce.

   When no job can be admitted, the governor reports the earliest time
   at which one could be when that time is computable, as defined in
   Section 12, and otherwise reports that it is waiting on a state
   change. The periodic timer MUST NOT fire earlier than a reported time.
   A throttled tree sleeps or waits. It does not poll.

   Denial is not an outcome. An obligation whose admission is denied
   stays Pending, the baseline cursor does not advance past it, a command
   barrier attached to it remains attached, and a retry record keeps its
   phase, reasons, and barriers.

15.4.  Foreground Allowance

   Reads dispatched to satisfy an accepted `refresh` or `load` command
   draw on the foreground buckets. The foreground buckets have their own
   rate and capacity. They are reservations within the shared physical
   ceilings: a foreground read still needs a free slot in its domain
   window and in the global in-flight limit and still counts against the
   memory ceiling. Exhausting the foreground allowance queues the
   command's reads; it neither fails the command nor borrows from the
   background buckets. Section 9 places no wall-clock bound on command
   completion.

   Each command additionally has a ceiling on the worker time its reads
   may be admitted with. The ceiling bounds admission: once the cost
   admitted or charged for the command reaches it, no further operation
   for that command is admitted. A running uninterruptible read MAY
   overshoot it. When a required read remains after the ceiling is
   reached, the command fails with ResourceLimited under Section 13.1;
   this is a terminal outcome, not throttling with a resume time.

   Priority directories, policy invalidation, and root recovery are
   background work. They change which directory is read next. They do
   not draw on the foreground allowance.

15.5.  Per-Domain Concurrency and Adaptation

   Every storage domain has a concurrency window with a floor of one and
   a ceiling equal to the smallest of the configured per-domain maximum,
   the global in-flight limit, and the ceiling for the domain's access
   topology. A domain whose topology is Unknown, remote, userspace,
   removable, or virtual starts with a window of one. Local block
   storage MAY start higher but not above two.

   The window adapts to measurements. The normative requirements on
   adaptation are:

      it starts from the conservative initial window above;
      it increases only on sustained evidence of low latency, bounded
      variance, and no errors, and by a bounded step per window's worth
      of completions;
      it decreases promptly, by at least half, on evidence of contention:
      tail latency above a target derived from the standing-delay
      signal, an error in the recent history, queue delay exceeding the
      product of the window and the mean latency, or a worker beyond the
      stuck threshold;
      it never exceeds the ceiling, whatever labels or measurements say;
      it moves concurrency only, never a duty rate, a capacity, or any
      configured ceiling.

   The specified current strategy is additive increase and multiplicative
   decrease [AIMD] driven by a moving-minimum latency signal [CODEL].
   Another controller that meets the requirements above is conforming.
   Token buckets in Section 15.3 are likewise the specified strategy;
   the contract is the admission bound, the full-cost debt, and the
   physical ceilings, not the bucket itself.

   A domain that behaves like an overloaded remote volume is treated as
   one regardless of how it is labelled.

   Implementations MUST NOT run synthetic benchmarks at startup to
   classify a domain. Measurements come from work the tree needed to
   perform anyway.

15.6.  Resource-Limited State

   Health gains a resource field orthogonal to the fields defined in
   Section 7.4. It reports, per storage domain, whether admission is
   currently Nominal or Throttled, and when Throttled, the cause:

      DutyBudget, the domain or global background bucket is exhausted;
      Concurrency, the domain window is fully occupied;
      Memory, accounted memory is at the configured ceiling;
      ForegroundCeiling, the foreground allowance is exhausted; or
      StuckWorker, a worker on the domain has exceeded the stuck
      threshold and the domain is quarantined until it returns;

   together with the earliest time at which admission can resume, when
   that time is computable, and otherwise the state change that will
   free capacity.

   A listing that exceeds a configured limit on entries, result bytes,
   or accounted memory is rejected in full with a ResourceLimited outcome
   under Section 13.1. The previous snapshot is retained and the path is
   reported as degraded with a resource-limit cause.

   Throttling and resource-limit rejection MUST be observable through
   the statistics in Section 16 in enough detail that a consumer can
   state which domain was throttled, by which cause, against which
   configured limit, and until when.

15.7.  Storage Cost Model

   Let:

      N be the number of represented entries;
      D be the number of loaded directories;
      B be the configured batch size; and
      C be the configured global in-flight limit.

   Snapshot storage is O(N). Coordinator state per represented entry is
   bounded by a constant. Per-round bookkeeping SHOULD be bounded by the
   number of exceptional obligations, those that are designated,
   accepted ahead of the cursor, awaiting a post-barrier successor, or
   unsatisfied, plus C plus B, rather than by D. Retaining the snapshot
   version current at round start as the frozen set, as Section 11.8
   permits, satisfies this. An implementation that still enumerates the
   obligation set conforms as long as the round semantics of Section
   11.8 hold; the bound above is the target for the representation, not
   a mandate on it.

   A dispatch cycle admits at most B jobs, and at most C are in flight,
   but neither number bounds cost. Admitted cost is bounded by the
   buckets in Section 15.3; actual cost is charged in full and exceeds
   the admitted cost only through a running call that cannot be
   interrupted. A single directory listing is bounded by the configured
   entries-per-directory limit and result-size limit, enforced while the
   listing is in progress under Section 10.2, so a directory beyond the
   limit is never materialized in full.

   Path and identity indexes SHOULD provide logarithmic or amortized
   constant-time lookup. Snapshot publication SHOULD structurally share
   unchanged data.

   Excluded and unloaded directories consume entry metadata only and
   incur no periodic work.

15.8.  Defaults

   The defaults in Section 9.2 are chosen so that a tree opened with no
   configuration cannot consume more than a small fraction of one
   filesystem worker on any storage domain, cannot hold more than a
   bounded number of entries, and cannot enumerate a directory of
   unbounded size. Consumers that need more capacity raise the relevant
   limit explicitly and accept the resulting resource use.

15.9.  Scope Across Trees

   The governor is scoped to the host process. Every Tree instance
   opened in one process shares one host governor: one set of physical
   ceilings on in-flight workers and accounted memory, one global
   background bucket, one global foreground bucket, one bootstrap
   allowance, and one accounting of worker time per storage domain. The
   host governor owns the limits listed as host defaults in Section 9.2.
   Per-tree budgets MAY be configured beneath it and only tighten it.

   Per-domain buckets are shared by every tree that reaches the same
   domain. For that to hold, adapters MUST report the same domain
   identity for the same mount to every tree in the process; a domain
   whose identity is Unknown is accounted as its own domain per tree,
   which is conservative because it splits the global envelope rather
   than multiplying it.

   A consumer that opens many trees, such as an editor with many
   worktrees, therefore cannot multiply the envelope by opening more
   trees. The envelope is per process. An API that opens a tree under an
   independent governor is an explicit opt-out from this section and
   MUST be named as one.

   Separate processes cannot be governed by this specification. A host
   that runs several processes using this library relies on operating
   system mechanisms to bound their aggregate; the library reports its
   own accounting so that such mechanisms can be configured.


16.  Observability

   The implementation exposes at least:

      current snapshot version
      initial scan state
      current reconciliation generation
      time and duration of the last successful round
      baseline cursor position and obligation counts, as total,
      accepted, unsatisfied, and removed
      priority cursor progress
      loaded and represented entry counts
      queued and in-flight job counts
      watcher backend and health
      dropped or coalesced watcher hint counts
      listing latency and failure counts
      degraded paths
      storage domains entered, with their declared capabilities and
      the source of each declaration
      per-domain concurrency window and in-flight count
      per-domain worker time consumed and granted, bucket level, and
      debt
      throttled job count and total throttled duration
      effective background duty per domain
      listing, metadata, and enumeration counts per domain
      per-domain latency summaries
      largest directories encountered
      accounted memory and snapshot bytes
      stuck workers with their paths, operations, and start times
      resource-limit events with cause and the configured limit
      domain-crossing decisions

   Consumers MUST receive the orthogonal health fields defined in
   Section 7.4. In particular, watcher degradation does not imply root
   unavailability, reconciliation degradation does not terminate
   snapshot reads, and throttling implies neither.

   The statistics MUST suffice for a consumer to state, without further
   inspection, that indexing was throttled because a named storage
   domain exceeded a named configured resource-safety limit.

   Logs SHOULD state the scheduling reason for a listing without logging
   file contents.


17.  Testing Strategy

17.1.  Deterministic Integration Tests

   A deterministic fake filesystem and executor cover:

      initial recursive scan
      watch-before-list ordering at the root and descendants
      recursive and non-recursive watcher backends
      both watch-registration failure modes
      silently dropped create, remove, modify, and rename events
      watcher overflow and restart
      unchanged, future-dated, and decreasing mtimes
      directory changes with unchanged mtime
      configured metadata changes with unchanged directory mtime
      Unloaded-to-Loading transitions and failed first listings
      pre-cursor acceptance and pre-barrier successor reads
      every command target-resolution outcome
      priority sets larger than one batch
      baseline progress under continuous priority and watcher work
      policy invalidation during scanning
      recursive policy-context invalidation
      removal, replacement, and unloading during an in-flight listing
      parent listings racing child metadata reads
      transient and persistent I/O errors
      first-attempt round degradation before the transient threshold
      initial missing or non-directory roots
      root removal, empty publication, and fresh-incarnation recovery
      case-only renames
      atomic rename and canonical path-change order
      symbolic links represented without traversal
      large and empty directories
      closed-batch completion under asynchronous job ordering
      recoverable errors without snapshot or health changes
      clean shutdown with work in flight

   Time-based tests use an injected monotonic clock. They MUST NOT depend
   on wall-clock sleeps.

17.2.  Model-Based Tests

   Random operation sequences are applied to both the implementation and
   a reference model that performs complete listings. After the fake
   filesystem becomes quiescent and a successful round completes, both
   snapshots MUST agree for all loaded paths.

17.3.  Property Tests

   The following properties hold for every generated history:

      snapshot versions increase monotonically
      EntryId values are never reused
      updates transform their previous snapshot into their new snapshot
      path changes follow canonical transaction order
      no excluded entry has a represented descendant
      no unloaded directory has represented immediate children
      no Loading directory has represented immediate children
      baseline cursor progress is finite under sustained expedited work
      failed or stale jobs cannot resurrect removed entries
      at most one snapshot-producing job per EntryId is active
      no stale publication guard can commit
      a sibling's commit never stales an unrelated sibling's job
      an older parent listing never overwrites a newer committed child
      publication
      a Fatal completion terminates the tree even when its guards are stale
      a stale coverage tag can commit but cannot satisfy newer coverage
      every command read satisfying a barrier is post-barrier
      policy-context invalidation reevaluates represented descendants

17.4.  Fault Injection

   Tests inject watcher loss, delayed and reordered job completion,
   channel closure, timeout, permission denial, malformed paths, worker
   cancellation between enumeration chunks, stuck workers, and storage
   domain changes at every state transition.

17.5.  Resource Safety Tests

   Resource safety is tested as an invariant, with injected worker time
   and an injected clock. A deterministic fake filesystem and executor
   cover:

      an effectively infinite watcher-event stream
      a watcher storm concurrent with baseline reconciliation
      a tree with more directories than the budget admits per period
      a single directory larger than the entry ceiling
      metadata calls and listings charged extreme worker time
      a remote-like domain with high, variable latency
      domain crossings under each crossing mode
      several domains with different costs in one tree
      dropped watcher events under throttling
      retries during throttling
      an explicit refresh storm
      an initial scan larger than the permitted budget
      cancellation between enumeration chunks
      a subtree whose domain changes in place
      worker loss during a chunked listing
      resource limits reached while publication guards become stale

   For every generated history the following hold:

      no filesystem operation runs without a governor grant
      background worker time admitted over every window stays within the
      configured rate and burst, per domain and globally
      actual cost of every operation is charged in full and a bucket in
      debt admits nothing until repaid
      physical in-flight workers never exceed the per-domain windows or
      the global limit, stuck workers included
      foreground admitted cost stays within its rate, burst, and per
      command ceiling, and a command past its ceiling fails with
      ResourceLimited rather than admitting more
      background and foreground buckets never transfer capacity
      a watcher storm changes no rate, burst, or ceiling, and total
      admitted background work under a storm stays within the same
      envelope as without one
      a listing session yields at every lease boundary and performs no
      operation beyond its lease
      a starved baseline obligation is admitted once budget permits and
      a slot is free
      a stuck worker on one domain ends its logical job, leaves the
      closed batch, and does not delay another domain's baseline
      a tree opened alongside other trees shares their envelope
      governor denial changes no obligation, cursor, barrier, or retry
      state
      throttling never causes a stale result to commit
      a listing that exceeds an entry, byte, or memory ceiling publishes
      nothing
      a snapshot handle taken before a rejected listing still reads its
      own version
      a domain crossing charges the child domain from its first listing
      one domain's debt never reduces another domain's admissible rate
      a stuck worker keeps its slot and quarantines its domain until it
      returns, so a dead domain never gains a second stuck worker
      a session suspended between leases holds no worker slot
      a labelled domain that measures slow converges to a window of one
      throttling is reported in the resource health field and never as
      degradation
      convergence resumes when capacity returns
      no test depends on wall-clock sleeps

17.6.  Benchmarks

   Benchmarks report startup, one reconciliation round, update latency,
   snapshot publication, large directories, deep trees, high event rates,
   and high-latency filesystems against fixed public workload fixtures.
   This specification does not mandate hardware-dependent absolute latency
   values.


18.  Alternatives and Prior Art

18.1.  Watcher Events Only

   Rejected. Native watcher APIs can overflow, omit events, fail on
   network filesystems, and expose registration gaps. They cannot provide
   eventual convergence by themselves [INOTIFY] [FSEVENTS] [RDCW].

18.2.  Polling Only

   Viable for correctness but rejected as the default. It increases
   normal change latency or background I/O. Watcher hints provide cheap
   low-latency scheduling while reconciliation provides correctness.
   `notify::PollWatcher` and Parcel's brute-force snapshot backends
   demonstrate this trade-off [NOTIFY] [PARCEL-WATCHER].

18.3.  Modification-Time Gating

   Rejected. Directory mtimes can be coarse, unchanged, future-dated,
   or explicitly set independently of contents [RACY-GIT]
   [POSIX-UTIMENS]. Some filesystems do not report correct change dates
   [NOTIFY]. Adding race windows and observation deadlines moves
   uncertainty into scheduler state without proving directory contents.

18.4.  Full-Tree Periodic Rescan

   Rejected as the normal path. It creates work spikes proportional to the
   complete loaded tree. The cursor provides equivalent eventual coverage
   with bounded scheduling.

18.5.  Priority Directories Without Reserved Baseline Capacity

   Rejected. A priority set as large as the batch can prevent the baseline
   cursor from moving forever, violating the directory guarantee.

18.6.  Mutable Shared Snapshot

   Rejected. Readers could observe partial directory transitions and
   update ordering would be ambiguous. Immutable versioned snapshots make
   publication atomic and diffs reproducible.

18.7.  Existing Recovery Systems

   Apple recommends monitoring before scanning, rebuilding a hierarchy
   snapshot from directory contents, and periodically sweeping when event
   history is advisory [FSEVENTS].

   `notify` exposes native loss as `Flag::Rescan` and offers `PollWatcher`
   where native events are unavailable or unreliable [NOTIFY]. It emits
   events but does not define the application snapshot or its convergence
   contract.

   Parcel exposes recursive subscriptions and historical snapshot queries
   over native or brute-force backends [PARCEL-WATCHER]. Watchman responds
   to event loss by recursively recrawling a watched root [WATCHMAN].

   These systems establish rescan and polling as standard recovery
   techniques. This specification differs by making bounded, watcher-
   independent reconciliation part of the snapshot contract rather than
   an exceptional whole-tree recovery operation.


19.  Conformance

   A conforming implementation:

   1. satisfies the consistency contract in Section 5 without relying on
      watcher delivery or metadata equality;

   2. implements the frozen obligation-set and round transitions in
      Section 11.8;

   3. admits every listing reason through one fair, bounded scheduler;

   4. validates every completed job against the publication guards in
      Section 11.4 and applies reconciliation generations only as coverage
      tags;

   5. publishes immutable, version-ordered snapshots and bounded update
      streams;

   6. reports degraded and terminal states without silently discarding
      required work;

   7. passes deterministic tests with all watcher events suppressed;

   8. admits every filesystem operation through the resource governor of
      Section 15, stays within the admission envelope and the physical
      ceilings over every window, and charges actual cost in full;

   9. never claims to interrupt a running filesystem call, and reports
      stuck workers;

   10. detects storage-domain crossings and does not traverse a foreign
       domain under the default crossing mode; and

   11. passes the resource-safety tests of Section 17.5.

   Snapshot serialization and process-restart identity are outside this
   specification. EntryId values and in-memory snapshots are scoped to one
   tree instance.


20.  Security Considerations

   Filesystem paths, directory entries, policy results, and watcher events
   are untrusted inputs.

   Implementations MUST:

   1. reject relative paths that escape the configured root;

   2. represent symbolic links without traversing them;

   3. enforce configured limits for watcher paths, command paths, priority
      paths, pending commands, represented entries, entries per directory,
      result bytes per listing, accounted memory, worker time per domain
      and globally, per-domain concurrency, retry state, dispatch batch
      size, and worker concurrency;

   4. avoid recursive call-stack traversal for attacker-controlled depth;

   5. preserve filenames that are not valid Unicode without lossy path
      identity;

   6. reject stale job results after root-incarnation, entry, load, policy,
      target-state, child-binding, change, or dispatch generation changes;

   7. avoid exposing file contents through updates or diagnostics; and

   8. validate watcher hints against filesystem reads before committing
      structural snapshot changes.

   A directory exceeding configured representation limits is degraded, not
   truncated. A truncated listing MUST NOT be committed because it could
   falsely remove entries beyond the limit. A listing session stops
   enumerating at the ceiling; it MUST NOT materialize the whole
   directory to discover the overflow. Retry count can be unbounded
   while a target remains eligible, but retry state is bounded to one
   coalesced record per represented read target plus one root-recovery
   record. A Loading target uses that one record for its current watch or
   listing phase. Retry admission obeys the scheduler limits.

   This specification does not define a security boundary against a
   hostile process that can replace path components between filesystem
   operations. An adapter claiming that stronger property MUST use
   handle-relative operations or an equivalent platform mechanism. Linux
   `openat2` with either `RESOLVE_BENEATH` or `RESOLVE_IN_ROOT`, optionally
   combined with `RESOLVE_NO_SYMLINKS`, illustrates such enforcement
   [OPENAT2].


21.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.


22.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC 2119
              Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>.


23.  Informative References

   [BTRFS]  Btrfs contributors, "btrfs(5)", Btrfs documentation, section
            "Subvolumes", <https://btrfs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/btrfs-man5.html>.

   [AIMD]  Chiu, D. and R. Jain, "Analysis of the Increase and Decrease
           Algorithms for Congestion Avoidance in Computer Networks",
           Computer Networks and ISDN Systems 17(1), 1989,
           DOI 10.1016/0169-7552(89)90019-6.

   [CODEL]  Nichols, K., Jacobson, V., McGregor, A., and J. Iyengar,
            "Controlled Delay Active Queue Management", RFC 8289,
            DOI 10.17487/RFC8289, January 2018,
            <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8289>.

   [FANOTIFY]  Linux man-pages project, "fanotify(7)", Linux man-pages
               6.18, <https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/fanotify.7.html>.

   [FILE-ID-INFO]  Microsoft, "FILE_ID_INFO structure (winbase.h)",
                   <https://learn.microsoft.com/windows/win32/api/winbase/ns-winbase-file_id_info>.

   [FSEVENTS]  Apple Inc., "File System Events Programming Guide: Using
               the File System Events API", 13 December 2012,
               <https://developer.apple.com/library/archive/documentation/Darwin/Conceptual/FSEvents_ProgGuide/UsingtheFSEventsFramework/UsingtheFSEventsFramework.html>.

   [GETATTRLIST]  Apple Inc., "getattrlist(2)", macOS manual pages,
                  <https://keith.github.io/xcode-man-pages/getattrlist.2.html>.

   [GETDENTS]  Linux man-pages project, "getdents(2)", Linux man-pages
               6.18, <https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/getdents.2.html>.

   [INOTIFY]  Linux man-pages project, "inotify(7)", Linux man-pages 6.18,
              14 February 2026,
              <https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/inotify.7.html>.

   [MS-FSCC]  Microsoft, "[MS-FSCC]: File System Control Codes",
              sections 2.1.10 and 2.5.9 and Appendix B,
              <https://learn.microsoft.com/openspecs/windows_protocols/ms-fscc/>.

   [NOTIFY]  notify-rs contributors, "notify", version 8.2.0,
             15 June 2026,
             <https://docs.rs/notify/8.2.0/notify/>,
             <https://docs.rs/notify/8.2.0/notify/event/enum.Flag.html>.

   [OPENAT2]  Linux man-pages project, "openat2(2)", Linux man-pages 6.18,
              8 February 2026,
              <https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/openat2.2.html>.

   [PARCEL-WATCHER]  Parcel contributors, "@parcel/watcher",
                     accessed 2 September 2026,
                     <https://github.com/parcel-bundler/watcher>.

   [POSIX-READDIR]  The Open Group, "readdir", The Open Group Base
                    Specifications Issue 8, IEEE Std 1003.1-2024,
                    <https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9799919799/functions/readdir.html>.

   [POSIX-UTIMENS]  The Open Group, "futimens, utimensat, utimes", The
                    Open Group Base Specifications Issue 8,
                    IEEE Std 1003.1-2024,
                    <https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9799919799/functions/futimens.html>.

   [RACY-GIT]  Git project, "Racy Git",
               <https://git-scm.com/docs/racy-git>.

   [RDCW]  Microsoft, "ReadDirectoryChangesW function (winbase.h)",
           <https://learn.microsoft.com/windows/win32/api/winbase/nf-winbase-readdirectorychangesw>.

   [RUST-READ-DIR]  Rust project, "std::fs::read_dir", Rust 1.98.0,
                    18 August 2026,
                    <https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/fs/fn.read_dir.html>.

   [STATMOUNT]  Linux man-pages project, "statmount(2)", Linux man-pages
                6.18,
                <https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/statmount.2.html>.

   [STATX]  Linux man-pages project, "statx(2)", Linux man-pages 6.18,
            <https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/statx.2.html>.

   [TOKIO-BLOCKING]  Tokio contributors, "tokio::task::spawn_blocking",
                     tokio 1.53,
                     <https://docs.rs/tokio/1.53.1/tokio/task/fn.spawn_blocking.html>.

   [WATCHMAN]  Meta Open Source, "Watchman Troubleshooting: Recrawl",
               accessed 2 September 2026,
               <https://facebook.github.io/watchman/docs/troubleshooting#recrawl>.

   [WIN32-FIND-DATA]  Microsoft, "WIN32_FIND_DATAW structure
                      (minwinbase.h)",
                      <https://learn.microsoft.com/windows/win32/api/minwinbase/ns-minwinbase-win32_find_dataw>.
